<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Bojjh'aṅga-parittaṁ</title>
  <link href="../Styles/bottomnav.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
  <link href="../Styles/main.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
  <link href="../Styles/suttaref.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
</head>

<body>
  <h2 class="h2-paritta">Bojjh'aṅga-parittaṁ<a id="bojjhana-parittam"></a></h2>

  <p class="pali-leader">〈 Bojjh'aṅgo sati-saṅkhāto&#160;〉</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Dhammānaṁ vicayo tathā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Viriyam'pīti-passaddhi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Bojjh'aṅgā ca tathā'pare</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Samādh'upekkha-bojjh'aṅgā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Satt'ete sabba-dassinā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Muninā samma'd'akkhātā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Bhāvitā bahulī-katā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Saṁvattanti abhiññāya</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Nibbānāya ca bodhiyā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etena sacca-vajjena</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sotthi te hotu sabbadā</p>

  <p class="english-hang">The Factors for Awakening include mindfulness,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Investigation of qualities,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Persistence, rapture, &amp; serenity,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Plus concentration &amp; equanimity factors for Awakening.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">These seven, which the All-seeing Sage has perfectly taught,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">When developed &amp; matured bring about heightened knowledge, Liberation, &amp; awakening.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By the saying of this truth,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">May you always be well.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Ekasmiṁ samaye nātho</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Moggallānañ'ca kassapaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Gilāne dukkhite disvā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Bojjh'aṅge satta desayi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Te ca taṁ abhinanditvā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Rogā mucciṁsu taṅ'khaṇe</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etena sacca-vajjena</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sotthi te hotu sabbadā</p>

  <p class="english-hang">At one time, our Protector seeing that Moggallana &amp; Kassapa</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Were sick &amp; in pain, taught them the seven factors for Awakening.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">They, delighting in that, were instantly freed from their illness.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By the saying of this truth, may you always be well.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Ekadā dhamma-rājā'pi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Gelaññen'ābhipīḷito</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Cundattherena taññ'eva</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Bhaṇāpetvāna sādaraṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sammoditvā ca ābādhā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tamhā vuṭṭhāsi ṭhānaso</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etena sacca-vajjena</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sotthi te hotu sabbadā</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Once, when the Dhamma King was afflicted with fever,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">He had the Elder Cunda recite that very teaching with devotion.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">And as he approved, he rose up from that disease.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By the saying of this truth, may you always be well.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Pahīnā te ca ābādhā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tiṇṇannam'pi mah'esinaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Magg'āhata-kilesā va</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Patt'ānuppatti-dhammataṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etena sacca-vajjena</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sotthi te hotu sabbadā</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Those diseases were abandoned by the three great seers,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Just as defilements are demolished by the Path</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">In accordance with step-by-step attainment.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By the saying of this truth, may you always be well.</p>

  <div class="suttaref">
    <p class="pali-hang">[Thai]</p>
  </div>
</body>
</html>