<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Devatā-uyyojana-gāthā</title>
  <link href="../Styles/bottomnav.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
  <link href="../Styles/main.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
  <link href="../Styles/suttaref.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
</head>

<body>
  <h2 class="h2-paritta">Devatā-uyyojana-gāthā<a id="devata-uyyojana-gatha"></a></h2>

  <p style="text-align:center;">〈 Dukkhappattā ca niddukkhā 〉</p>

  Bhayappattā ca nibbhayā<br/>

  Sokappattā ca nissokā<br/>

  Hontu sabbe pi pāṇino 

  <div class="english">
    <p>[May] sufferers be without suffering,<br/> The fear-struck be without fear,<br/> The grief-stricken be without grief<br/> [Thus] may all beings be.</p>
  </div>

  <p>Ettāvatā ca amhehi<br/> Sambhataṁ puñña-sampadaṁ<br/> Sabbe devā anumodantu<a href="endnotes.xhtml#en129appendix"><sup>129</sup></a><br/> Sabba-sampatti-siddhiyā</p>

  <div class="english">
    <p>To the extent that all of us<br/> Have accumulated a wealth of merits;<br/> In this may all devas rejoice,<br/> For the attainment of all fortunes.</p>
  </div>

  <p>Dānaṁ dadantu saddhāya<br/> Sīlaṁ rakkhantu sabbadā<br/> Bhāvan'ābhiratā hontu<br/> Gacchantu devatā-gatā</p>

  <div class="english">
    <p>May they give gifts with faith.<br/> May they guard moral precepts always.<br/> May they delight in mind-development.<br/> May the deities who have come go [back].</p>
  </div>

  <p>〈 Sabbe buddhā balappattā 〉 Paccekānañ'ca yaṁ balaṁ<br/> Arahantānañ'ca tejena<br/> Rakkhaṁ bandhāmi sabbaso</p>

  <p>All Buddhas possess [supernormal] strength.<br/> And [there is] the power of Paccekabuddhas.<br/> By the power of the arahants too,<br/> I create protection for all times.</p>

  <div class="suttaref">
    <p>[MJG]</p>
  </div>
</body>
</html>