<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title>Undertaking the Eight Trainings</title>
  <link href="../Styles/main.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
  <link href="../Styles/suttaref.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
</head>

<body>
  <div class="section-title">
    Undertaking the Eight Trainings
  </div>

  <p style="text-align:center;">(Repeat each phrase after the leader)</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Pāṇ'ātipātā veramaṇi-sikkhāpadaṁ samādiyāmi.</p>

  <p class="english-hang">I undertake the training to refrain from taking the life of any living being.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Adinn'ādānā veramaṇi-sikkhāpadaṁ samādiyāmi.</p>

  <p class="english-hang">I undertake the training to refrain from taking that which is not given.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Abrahmacariyā veramaṇi-sikkhāpadaṁ samādiyāmi.</p>

  <p class="english-hang">I undertake the training to refrain from any intentional sexual activity.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Musāvādā veramaṇi-sikkhāpadaṁ samādiyāmi.</p>

  <p class="english-hang">I undertake the training to refrain from lying.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Surāmeraya-majja-pamādaṭṭhānā veramaṇi-sikkhāpadaṁ samādiyāmi.</p>

  <p class="english-hang">I undertake the training to refrain from consuming intoxicating drink and drugs that<a id="en142" href="endnotes.xhtml#en142appendix"><sup>142</sup></a> lead to carelessness.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Vikālabhojanā veramaṇi-sikkhāpadaṁ samādiyāmi.</p>

  <p class="english-hang">I undertake the training to refrain from eating after noon.<a id="en143" href="endnotes.xhtml#en143appendix"><sup>143</sup></a></p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Nacca-gīta-vādita-visūka-dassanā mālā-gandha-vilepana-dhāraṇa-maṇḍana-vibhūsanaṭṭhānā veramaṇi-sikkhāpadaṁ samādiyāmi.</p>

  <p class="english-hang">I undertake the training to refrain from dancing, singing, music and going to entertainments; from perfumes, beautification and adornments.<a id="en144" href="endnotes.xhtml#en144appendix"><sup>144</sup></a></p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Uccāsayana-mahāsayanā veramaṇi-sikkhāpadaṁ samādiyāmi.</p>

  <p class="english-hang">I undertake the training to refrain from lying on a high or luxurious sleeping place.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Imāni aṭṭha sikkhāpadāni samādiyāmi [3x]</p>

  <p class="english-hang">I undertake these Eight Trainings.</p>

  <p class="pali-leader">〈 Imāni aṭṭha sikkhāpadāni sīlena sugatiṁ yanti sīlena bhogasampadā sīlena nibbutiṁ yanti tasmā sīlaṁ visodhaye&#160;〉</p>

  <p class="english-hang">These Eight Trainings have virtue as a vehicle for happiness, have virtue as a vehicle for good fortune, have virtue as a vehicle for liberation. Therefore let virtue be purified.<a id="en145" href="endnotes.xhtml#en145appendix"><sup>145</sup></a></p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Sādhu, sādhu, sādhu</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">(Bow 3x)</p>
</body>
</html>