<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title>The Fire Sermon</title>
  <link href="../Styles/bottomnav.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
  <link href="../Styles/main.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
  <link href="../Styles/suttaref.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
</head>

<body>
  <h2><a style="font-style:normal;" href="schedule.xhtml">The Fire Sermon</a><a id="fire-sermon"></a></h2>

  <hr/>

  <p class="pali-leader">〈 Thus have I heard&#160;〉</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">On one occasion<a id="en113" href="endnotes.xhtml#en113appendix"><sup>113</sup></a> the Blessed One was dwelling at Gayā &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> at Gayā's Head &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> together with a thousand bhikkhus. There he addressed the bhikkhus:</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">Bhikkhus all is burning!</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">And what bhikkhus is the all that is burning?</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">Bhikkhus the eye is burning &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> forms are burning &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> eye-consciousness is burning &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> eye-contact is burning&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and what is felt as pleasant or painful &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> or neither-painful-nor-pleasant &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> that arises from eye-contact as its condition &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> that too is burning.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together" style="font-style: italic;">Burning with what?</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together" style="font-style: italic;">Burning with the fire of lust &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with the fire of hate &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with the fire of delusion.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together" style="font-style: italic;">I say it is burning with birth &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> ageing and death &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with sorrows &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with lamentations &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with pains &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with displeasures &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with despairs.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">The ear is burning &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> sounds are burning &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> ear-consciousness is burning &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> ear-contact is burning &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and what is felt as pleasant or painful &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> or neither-painful-nor-pleasant &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> that arises from ear-contact as its condition &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> that too is burning.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together" style="font-style: italic;">Burning with what?</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together" style="font-style: italic;">Burning with the fire of lust &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with the fire of hate &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with the fire of delusion.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together" style="font-style: italic;">I say it is burning with birth &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> ageing and death &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with sorrows &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with lamentations &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with pains &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with displeasures &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with despairs.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">The nose is burning &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> odours are burning &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> nose-consciousness is burning &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> nose-contact is burning &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and what is felt as pleasant or painful &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> or neither-painful-nor-pleasant &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> that arises from nose-contact as its condition &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> that too is burning. Burning with what? Burning with the fire of lust &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with the fire of hate &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with the fire of delusion. I say it is burning with birth &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> ageing and death &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with sorrows &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with lamentations &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with pains &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with displeasures &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with despairs.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">The tongue is burning &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> flavours are burning &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> tongue-consciousness is burning &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> tongue-contact is burning &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and what is felt as pleasant or painful &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> or neither-painful-nor-pleasant &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> that arises from tongue-contact as its condition &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> that too is burning. Burning with what? Burning with the fire of lust &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with the fire of hate &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with the fire of delusion. I say it is burning with birth &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> ageing and death &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with sorrows &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with lamentations &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with pains &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with displeasures &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with despairs.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">The body is burning &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> tangibles are burning &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> body-consciousness is burning &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> body-contact is burning &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and what is felt as pleasant or painful &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> or neither-painful-nor-pleasant &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> that arises from body-contact as its condition &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> that too is burning. Burning with what? Burning with the fire of lust &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with the fire of hate &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with the fire of delusion. I say it is burning with birth &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> ageing and death &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with sorrows &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with lamentations &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with pains &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with displeasures &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with despairs.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">The mind is burning &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> mind-objects are burning &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> mind-consciousness is burning &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> mind-contact is burning &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and what is felt as pleasant or painful &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> or neither-painful-nor-pleasant &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> that arises from mind-contact as its condition &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> that too is burning. Burning with what? Burning with the fire of lust &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with the fire of hate &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with the fire of delusion. I say it is burning with birth &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> ageing and death &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with sorrows &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with lamentations &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with pains &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with displeasures &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with despairs.</p>

  <p class="pali-leader">〈 Bhikkhus when a noble disciple&#160;〉</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">Who has heard the teaching sees thus &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> he becomes disenchanted with the eye &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> becomes disenchanted with forms &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> becomes disenchanted with eye-consciousness &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> becomes disenchanted with eye-contact &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and what is felt as pleasant or painful &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> or neither-painful-nor-pleasant &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> that arises from eye-contact as its condition &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with that too he becomes disenchanted.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">He becomes disenchanted with the ear &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> becomes disenchanted with sounds &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> becomes disenchanted with ear-consciousness &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> becomes disenchanted with ear-contact &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and what is felt as pleasant or painful &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> or neither-painful-nor-pleasant &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> that arises from ear-contact as its condition &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with that too be becomes disenchanted.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">He becomes disenchanted with the nose &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> becomes disenchanted with odours &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> becomes disenchanted with nose-consciousness &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> becomes disenchanted with nose-contact &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and what is felt as pleasant or painful &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> or neither-painful-nor-pleasant &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> that arises from nose-contact as its condition &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with that too he becomes disenchanted.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">He becomes disenchanted with the tongue &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> becomes disenchanted with flavours &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> becomes disenchanted with tongue-consciousness &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> becomes disenchanted with tongue-contact &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and what is felt as pleasant or painful &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> or neither-painful-nor-pleasant &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> that arises from tongue-contact as its condition &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with that too he becomes disenchanted.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">He becomes disenchanted with the body &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> becomes disenchanted with tangibles &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> becomes disenchanted with body-consciousness &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> becomes disenchanted with body-contact &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and what is felt as pleasant or painful &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> or neither-painful-nor-pleasant &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> that arises from body-contact as its condition &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with that too he becomes disenchanted.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">He becomes disenchanted with the mind &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> becomes disenchanted with mind-objects &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> becomes disenchanted with mind-consciousness &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> becomes disenchanted with mind-contact &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and what is felt as pleasant or painful &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> or neither-painful-nor-pleasant &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> that arises from mind-contact as its condition &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with that too he becomes disenchanted.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">When he is disenchanted passion fades away. With the fading of passion he is liberated. When liberated there is knowledge that he is liberated. He understands: “Birth is exhausted &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> the holy life is fulfilled &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> what has to be done is done &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> there is nothing else to do for the sake of liberation.”</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were glad and they approved of his words. Now during this utterance &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> the hearts of those thousand bhikkhus &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> were liberated from the taints through the cessation of clinging.</p>

  <div class="suttaref">
    <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">[SN 35.28]</p>
  </div>

  <div class="bottomnav">
    <a href="schedule.xhtml" style="font-style:normal" class="active">Schedule</a> &#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; <a href="gradual-training.xhtml" style="font-style:normal">Next</a>
  </div>
</body>
</html>