<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<!--?		xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?-->

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>The Gradual Training</title>
  <link href="../Styles/bottomnav.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
  <link href="../Styles/main.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
  <link href="../Styles/suttaref.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
</head>

<body>
  <h2><a style="font-style:normal;" href="schedule.xhtml">The Gradual Training</a><a id="gradual-training"></a></h2>

  <hr/>

  <p class="pali-leader">〈 Now let us recite the Gradual Training&#160;〉</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">&#8220;A householder or householder&#8217;s son&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> or one born in some other clan hears the Dhamma. On hearing the Dhamma he acquires faith in the Tathāgata. Possessing that faith he considers thus: &#8217;Household life is crowded and dusty&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> life gone forth is wide open. It is not easy while living at home&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> to lead the holy life utterly perfect and pure&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> as a polished shell. Suppose I shave off my hair and beard&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> put on the ochre robe&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and go forth from home to homelessness.&#8217; On a later occasion&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> abandoning a small or large amount of wealth&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> abandoning a small or large circle of relatives&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> he shaves off his hair and beard&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> puts on the ochre robe&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and goes forth from home to homelessness.</p>

  <div class="suttaref">
    <p>[MN 27 / 38 / 51]</p>
  </div>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">&#8220;Now is it possible Master Gotama&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> to describe a gradual training&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> gradual practice&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and gradual progress in this Dhamma and Vinaya?</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">&#8220;It is possible to describe a gradual training&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> gradual practice&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and gradual progress in this Dhamma and Vinaya. When the Tathāgata obtains a person to be tamed&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> he first disciplines him thus: &#8216;Come bhikkhu be virtuous&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> dwell restrained by the Pātimokkha&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> perfect in conduct and resort&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and seeing danger in the slightest faults&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> train by undertaking the training rules.</p>

  <div class="suttaref">
    <p>[MN 107]</p>
  </div>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">&#8220;Having thus gone forth&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and possessing the bhikkhus&#8217; training and way of life&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> abandoning the destruction of life&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> he abstains from destroying life&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with rod and weapon laid aside&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> conscientious&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> merciful&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> he abides compassionate to all living beings. Abandoning the taking of what is not given&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> he abstains from taking what is not given&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> taking only what is given&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> expecting only what is given&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> by not stealing he abides in purity.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">&#8220;Abandoning the household life&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> he observes the holy life&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> living apart&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> abstaining from the vulgar practice of sexual intercourse.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">&#8220;Abandoning false speech&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> he abstains from false speech&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> he speaks truth&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> adheres to truth&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> is trustworthy and reliable&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> one who is no deceiver of the world. Abandoning malicious speech&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> he abstains from malicious speech&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> he does not repeat elsewhere what he has heard here&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> in order to divide those people<a id="en66" href="endnotes.xhtml#en66appendix"><sup>66</sup></a> from these&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> nor does he repeat here what he has heard elsewhere&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> in order to divide these people from those&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> thus he is one who reunites those who are divided&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> a promoter of friendships&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> who enjoys unity&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> rejoices in unity&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> delights in unity&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> a speaker of words that promote unity. Abandoning harsh speech&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> he abstains from harsh speech&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> he speaks words that are gentle&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> pleasing to the ear&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and loveable&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> that go to the heart&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> are courteous&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> desired by many and agreeable to many. Abandoning idle chatter&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> he abstains from idle chatter&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> he speaks at the right time&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> speaks what is fact&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> speaks on what is good&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> speaks on the Dhamma and Vinaya&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> at the right time&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> he speaks words that are worth recording&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> reasonable&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> moderate&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and beneficial.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">&#8220;He abstains from harming seeds and plants. He practices eating one meal a day&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> abstaining from eating at night and outside the proper time.<a id="en67" href="endnotes.xhtml#en67appendix"><sup>67</sup></a> He abstains from dancing&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> singing&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> music and seeing entertainments. He abstains from wearing garlands&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> smartening himself with scent&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and embellishing himself with unguents. He abstains from high and luxurious sleeping places. He abstains from accepting gold and silver. He abstains from accepting raw grain. He abstains from accepting raw meat. He abstains from accepting women and girls. He abstains from accepting men and women slaves. He abstains from accepting goats and sheep. He abstains from accepting fowl and pigs. He abstains from accepting elephants&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> cattle&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> horses and mares. He abstains from accepting fields and land.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">&#8220;He abstains from running errands and messages. He abstains from buying and selling. He abstains from false weights&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> false metals&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and false measures. He abstains from accepting bribes&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> deceiving&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> defrauding&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and trickery. He abstains from wounding&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> murdering&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> binding&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> robbery&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> plunder and violence.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">&#8220;He becomes content with robes to protect his body&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and almsfood to maintain his stomach&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and wherever he goes he sets out taking only these with him. Just as a bird&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> wherever it goes&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> flies with its wings as its only burden&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> so too the bhikkhu becomes content&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with robes to protect his body&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and almsfood to maintain his stomach&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and wherever he goes&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> he sets out taking only these with him. Possessing this aggregate of noble virtue&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> he experiences within himself a bliss that is blameless.</p>

  <div class="suttaref">
    <p>[MN 51]</p>
  </div>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">&#8220;Then the Tathāgata disciplines him further: &#8216;Come bhikkhu&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> guard the doors of your sense faculties. On seeing a form with the eye&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> do not grasp at its signs and features. Since if you were to leave the eye faculty unguarded&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> evil unwholesome states of longing and grief might invade you&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> practice the way of its restraint&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> guard the eye faculty&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> undertake the restraint of the eye faculty. On hearing a sound with the ear. On smelling an odour with the nose. On tasting a flavour with the tongue. On touching a tangible with the body. On cognizing a mind-object with the mind&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> do not grasp at its signs and features. Since if you were to leave the mind faculty unguarded&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> evil unwholesome states of longing and grief might invade you&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> practice the way of its restraint&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> guard the mind faculty&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> undertake the restraint of the mind faculty.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">&#8220;Come bhikkhu&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> be moderate in eating. Wisely reflecting I use almsfood&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> not for fun&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> not for pleasure&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> not for fattening&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> not for beautification&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> only for the maintenance and nourishment of this body&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> for keeping it healthy&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> for helping with the holy life&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> thinking thus: I will allay hunger without overeating&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> so that I may continue to live blamelessly and at ease.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">&#8220;Come bhikkhu&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> be devoted to wakefulness. During the day&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> while walking back and forth and sitting&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> purify your mind of obstructive states. In the first watch of the night&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> while walking back and forth and sitting&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> purify your mind of obstructive states. In the middle watch of the night&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> you should lie down on the right side&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> in the lion&#8217;s pose&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with one foot overlapping the other&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> mindful and fully aware&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> after noting in your mind the time for rising. After rising in the third watch of the night&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> while walking back and forth and sitting&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> purify your mind of obstructive states.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">&#8220;Come bhikkhu&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> be possessed of mindfulness and full awareness. Act in full awareness when going forward and returning&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> act in full awareness when looking ahead and looking away&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> act in full awareness when flexing and extending your limbs&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> act in full awareness when wearing your robes&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and carrying your outer robe and bowl&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> act in full awareness when eating&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> drinking&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> consuming food&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and tasting&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> act in full awareness when defecating and urinating&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> act in full awareness when walking&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> standing&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> sitting&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> falling asleep&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> waking up<a id="en68" href="endnotes.xhtml#en68appendix"><sup>68</sup></a>&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> talking&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and keeping silent.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">&#8220;Come bhikkhu&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> resort to a secluded resting place: a forest&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> the foot of a tree&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> a mountain&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> a ravine&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> a hillside cave&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> a charnel ground&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> a jungle thicket&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> an open space&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> a heap of straw.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">&#8220;After his meal on returning from almsround he sits down&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> having crossed his legs&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> sets his body erect&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> having established mindfulness in front of him. Abandoning longing<a id="en69" href="endnotes.xhtml#en69appendix"><sup>69</sup></a> for the world&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> he abides with a mind free from longing&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> he purifies his mind from longing. Abandoning ill will and hatred&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> he abides with a mind free from ill will&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> compassionate for the welfare of all living beings&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> he&#160;purifies his mind from ill will and hatred. Abandoning sloth and torpor&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> he abides free from sloth and torpor&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> percipient of light&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> mindful and fully aware&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> he purifies his mind from sloth and torpor. Abandoning restlessness and remorse&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> he abides unagitated&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> with a mind inwardly peaceful&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> he purifies his mind from restlessness and remorse. Abandoning doubt&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> he abides having gone beyond doubt&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> unperplexed about wholesome states&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> he purifies his mind from doubt.</p>

  <div class="suttaref">
    <p>[MN 107]</p>
  </div>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">&#8220;When these five hindrances are unabandoned in himself&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> he sees them respectively as a debt&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> a disease&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> a prison&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> slavery&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and a road across a desert. But when these five hindrances have been abandoned in himself&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> he sees that as freedom from debt&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> freedom from disease&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> release from prison&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> freedom from slavery&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and a land of safety. Considering thus&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> he would be glad and full of joy.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">&#8220;Having abandoned these five hindrances&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> imperfections of the mind that weaken wisdom&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> he enters upon and abides in the first jhāna&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> the second jhāna&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> the third jhāna&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> the fourth jhāna.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">&#8220;When his concentrated mind is thus purified&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> bright&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> unblemished&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> rid of imperfection&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> malleable&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> wieldy&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> steady&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and attained to imperturbability&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> he directs it to knowledge of the recollection of past lives&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> to knowledge of the passing away and reappearance of beings&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and to knowledge of the destruction of the taints.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">&#8220;He understands as it actually is: This is suffering&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> This is the origin of suffering&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> This is the cessation of suffering&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> This is the way of practice&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> leading to the cessation of suffering&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> These are the taints&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> This is the origin of the taints&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> This is the cessation of the taints&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> This is the way of practice&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> leading to the cessation of the taints.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">&#8220;When he knows and sees thus&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> his mind is liberated from the taint of sensual desire&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> from the taint of being&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and from the taint of ignorance. When liberated there is knowledge that he is liberated. He understands: &#8216;Birth is exhausted&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> the holy life is fulfilled&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> what has to be done is done&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> there is nothing else to do for the sake of liberation.&#8217;</p>

  <div class="suttaref">
    <p>[MN 39]</p>
  </div>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">&#8220;This is my instruction to those bhikkhus who are in higher training&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> whose minds have not yet attained the goal&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> who abide aspiring to the supreme security from bondage&#8221;.</p>

  <div class="suttaref">
    <p>[MN 107]</p>
  </div>

  <div class="bottomnav">
    <a href="schedule.xhtml" style="font-style:normal" class="active">Schedule</a>&#160;&#160;<span class="wheel-of-dhamma">☸</span>&#160;&#160;<a href="sharing-aspirations.xhtml#sharing-aspirations" style="font-style:normal">Next</a>
  </div>
</body>
</html>