<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Jaya-maṅgala-aṭṭha-gāthā</title>
  <link href="../Styles/bottomnav.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
  <link href="../Styles/main.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
  <link href="../Styles/suttaref.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
</head>

<body>
  <h2 class="h2-paritta">Jaya-maṅgala-aṭṭha-gāthā<a id="jaya-mangala-attha-gatha"></a></h2>

  <p class="pali-leader">〈 Bāhuṁ&#160;〉</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Sahassam'abhinimmita sāvudhan'taṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Grīmekhalaṁ udita-ghora-sasena-māraṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Dān'ādi-dhamma-vidhinā jitavā<a id="en130" href="endnotes.xhtml#en130appendix"><sup>130</sup></a> mun'indo</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tan'tejasā bhavatu te jaya-maṅgalāni</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Creating a form with 1,000 arms, each equipped with a weapon,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Mara, on the elephant Girimekhala, uttered a frightening roar together with his troops.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">The Lord of Sages defeated him by means of such qualities as generosity:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By the power of this, may you have victory blessings.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Mār'ātirekam-abhiyujjhita-sabba-rattiṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Ghoram'pan'āḷavakam-akkhama-thaddha-yakkhaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Khantī-sudanta-vidhinā jitavā mun'indo</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tan'tejasā bhavatu te jaya-maṅgalāni</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Even more frightful than Māra making war all night</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Was Āḷavaka, the arrogant unstable ogre.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">The Lord of Sages defeated him by means of well-trained endurance:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By the power of this, may you have victory blessings.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Nāḷāgiriṁ gaja-varaṁ atimatta-bhūtaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Dāv'aggi-cakkam'asanīva sudāruṇan'taṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Mett'ambu-seka-vidhinā jitavā mun'indo</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tan'tejasā bhavatu te jaya-maṅgalāni</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Nāḷāgiri, the excellent elephant, when maddened,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Was very horrific, like a forest fire, a flaming discus, a lightning bolt.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">The Lord of Sages defeated him by sprinkling the water of good will:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By the power of this, may you have victory blessings.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Ukkhitta-khaggam-atihattha-sudāruṇan'taṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Dhāvan'ti-yojana-path'aṅguli-mālavantaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Iddhī'bhisaṅkhata-mano jitavā mun'indo</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tan'tejasā bhavatu te jaya-maṅgalāni</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Very horrific, with a sword upraised in his expert hand,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Garlanded-with-Fingers ran three leagues along the path.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">The Lord of Sages defeated him with mind-fashioned marvels:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By the power of this, may you have victory blessings.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Katvāna kaṭṭham'udaraṁ iva gabbhinīyā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Ciñcāya duṭṭha-vacanaṁ jana-kāya majjhe</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Santena soma-vidhinā jitavā mun'indo</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tan'tejasā bhavatu te jaya-maṅgalāni</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Having made a wooden belly to appear pregnant,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Ciñca made a lewd accusation in the midst of the gathering.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">The Lord of Sages defeated her with peaceful, gracious means:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By the power of this, may you have victory blessings.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Saccaṁ vihāya mati-saccaka-vāda-ketuṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Vād'ābhiropita-manaṁ ati-andha-bhūtaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Paññā-padīpa-jalito jitavā mun'indo</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tan'tejasā bhavatu te jaya-maṅgalāni</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Saccaka, whose provocative views had abandoned the truth,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Delighting in argument, had become thoroughly blind.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">The Lord of Sages defeated him with the light of discernment:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By the power of this, may you have victory blessings.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Nandopananda-bhujagaṁ vibudhaṁ mah'iddhiṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Puttena thera-bhujagena dam'āpayanto</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Iddh'ūpadesa-vidhinā jitavā mun'indo</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tan'tejasā bhavatu te jaya-maṅgalāni</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Nandopananda was a serpent with great power but wrong views.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">The Lord of Sages defeated him by means of a display of marvels,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Sending his son, the serpent-elder, to tame him:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By the power of this, may you have victory blessings.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Duggāha-diṭṭhi-bhujagena sudaṭṭha-hatthaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Brahmaṁ visuddhi-jutim-iddhi-bak'ābhidhānaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Ñāṇāgadena vidhinā jitavā mun'indo</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tan'tejasā bhavatu te jaya-maṅgalāni</p>

  <p class="english-hang">His hands bound tight by the serpent of wrongly held views,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Baka, the Brahma, thought himself pure in his radiance &amp; power.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">The Lord of Sages defeated him by means of his words of knowledge:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By the power of this, may you have victory blessings.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Etā pi buddha-jaya-maṅgala-aṭṭha-gāthā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Yo vācano dina-dine sarate'm'atandī</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Hitvān'aneka-vividhāni c'upaddavāni</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Mokkhaṁ sukhaṁ adhigameyya naro sapañño</p>

  <p class="english-hang">These eight verses of the Buddha’s victory blessings:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Whatever person of discernment recites or recalls them day after day without lapsing,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Destroying all kinds of obstacles,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Will attain emancipation &amp; happiness.</p>

  <div class="suttaref">
    <p class="pali-hang">[Trad]</p>
  </div>
</body>
</html>