<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Karaṇīya-metta-sutta</title>
  <link href="../Styles/bottomnav.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
  <link href="../Styles/main.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
  <link href="../Styles/suttaref.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
</head>

<body>
  <h2 class="h2-paritta">Karaṇīya-metta-sutta<a id="karaniya-metta-sutta"></a></h2>

  <p class="pali-leader">〈 Karaṇīya m-attha-kusalena&#160;〉</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Yan'taṁ santaṁ padaṁ abhisamecca</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sakko ujū ca suhujū ca</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Suvaco c'assa mudu anatimānī</p>

  <p class="english-hang">This is to be done by one skilled in the beneficial,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Having understood the path of peace.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">He would be able, upright, very upright,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Obedient, gentle, and not conceited.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Santussako ca subharo ca</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Appakicco ca sallahuka-vutti</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sant'indriyo ca nipako ca</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Appagabbho kulesu ananugiddho</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Content and easy to support,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Having little duties and a light livelihood;</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Calm in faculties and prudent,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Not impudent &amp; greedily attached to families.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Na ca khuddaṁ samācare kiñci</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Yena viññū pare upavadeyyuṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sukhino vā khemino hontu</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sabbe sattā bhavantu sukhit'attā</p>

  <p class="english-hang">He would not do the slightest thing,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">For which wise others would reproach.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Well and secure may [all beings] be;</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">May all beings be happy at heart.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Ye keci pāṇa-bhūt'atthi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tasā vā thāvarā vā anavasesā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Dīghā vā ye mahantā vā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Majjhimā rassakā aṇuka-thūlā</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Whatever breathing beings are born,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Whether timid or firm - without remainder</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Whether they are long or they are great,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Whether they are medium, short, minute or fat,</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Diṭṭhā vā ye ca adiṭṭhā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Ye ca dūre vasanti avidūre</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Bhūtā vā sambhavesī vā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sabbe sattā bhavantu sukhit'attā</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Whether they are seen or unseen,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Whether they live far away or not far away;</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Already born or seeking rebirth</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">May all beings be happy at heart.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Na paro paraṁ nikubbetha</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">N'ātimaññetha katthaci naṁ kiñci</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Byārosanā paṭīgha-saññā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">N'āññam-aññassa dukkham'iccheyya</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Another (i.e. one) would not deceive another,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Nor look down upon anyone anywhere;</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Nor through anger or hateful perception,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Would wish for one another's suffering.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Mātā yathā niyaṁ puttaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Āyusā eka-puttam'anurakkhe</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Evam pi sabba-bhūtesu</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Mānasam'bhāvaye aparimāṇaṁ</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Just as a mother [her] own child,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">[Her] only child, would protect with [her] life;</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Thus also, towards all beings,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">He would develop the mind without measure.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Mettañ'ca sabba-lokasmiṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Mānasam'bhāvaye aparimāṇaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Uddhaṁ adho ca tiriyañ'ca</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Asambādhaṁ averaṁ asapattaṁ</p>

  <p class="english-hang">And [with] mettā to the whole world,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">He would develop the mind without measure;</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Above, and below and across,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Unrestricted, without enmity or foe.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Tiṭṭhañ'caraṁ nisinno vā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sayāno vā yāvat'assa vigata-middho</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etaṁ satiṁ adhiṭṭheyya</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Brahmam'etaṁ vihāraṁ idham'āhu</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Whether standing, walking, sitting, or reclining,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Whenever he is free from drowsiness,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">He would resolve on that mindfulness</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">“That is a lofty dwelling,” here they say.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Diṭṭhiñ'ca anupagamma</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sīlavā dassanena sampanno</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Kāmesu vineyya gedhaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Na hi jātu gabbha-seyyaṁ punar-etī'ti</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Not having arrived at a [wrong] view,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Being virtuous and possessed of vision,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Having removed greed for sense pleasures,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">He never again returns to lie in a womb.</p>

  <div class="suttaref">
    <p class="pali-hang">[Snp 1.8]</p>
  </div>
</body>
</html>