<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Khandha-parittaṁ</title>
  <link href="../Styles/bottomnav.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
  <link href="../Styles/main.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
  <link href="../Styles/suttaref.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
</head>

<body>
  <h2 class="h2-paritta">Khandha-parittaṁ<a id="khandha-parittam"></a></h2>

  <p class="pali-leader">〈 Virūpakkhehi me mettaṁ&#160;〉</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Mettaṁ erāpathehi me</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Chabyā-puttehi me mettaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Mettaṁ kaṇhā-gotamakehi ca</p>

  <p class="english-hang">With the Virūpakkhas is my loving-kindness.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">My loving-kindness is with the Erāpathas.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">With the Chabyāputtas is my loving-kindness.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">And loving-kindness is with the Kaṇhāgotamakas.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Apādakehi me mettaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Mettaṁ di-pādakehi me</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Catuppadehi me mettaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Mettaṁ bahuppadehi me</p>

  <p class="english-hang">With the footless is my loving-kindness.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">My loving-kindness is with the two-footed.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">With the four-footed is my loving-kindness.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">My loving-kindness is with the many-footed.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Mā maṁ apādako hiṁsi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Mā maṁ hiṁsi di-pādako</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Mā maṁ catuppado hiṁsi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Mā maṁ hiṁsi bahuppado</p>

  <p class="english-hang">May the footless not harm me.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">May the two-footed harm me not.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">May the four-footed not harm me.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">May the many-footed harm me not.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Sabbe sattā sabbe pāṇā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sabbe bhūtā ca kevalā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sabbe bhadrāni passantu</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Mā kiñci pāpam-āgamā.</p>

  <p class="english-hang">All sentient beings, all who breathe,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">All the born — in totality</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">May they all meet with good fortune;</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">May they not come to any evil.</p>

  <p class="pali-leader">〈 Appamāṇo buddho&#160;〉</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Appamāṇo dhammo</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Appamāṇo saṅgho</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Pamāṇavantāni siriṁsapāni</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Ahi-vicchikā satapadī</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Uṇṇānābhī sarabhū mūsikā</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Measureless is the Buddha,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Measureless is the Dhamma,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Measureless is the Saṅgha.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Measureable are crawling creatures:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Snakes and scorpions and centipedes,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Spiders and lizards and mice and rats.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Katā me rakkhā katā me parittā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Paṭikkamantu bhūtāni</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">So'haṁ namo bhagavato</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Namo sattannaṁ sammā-sambuddhānaṁ.</p>

  <p class="english-hang">A safeguard has been made by me,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">A protection has been made by me.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Let the already born retreat.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">I pay homage to the Blessed One;</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Homage to the seven Perfectly Self-awakened Ones.</p>

  <div class="suttaref">
    <p class="pali-hang">[AN 4.67]</p>
  </div>
</body>
</html>