<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Maṅgala-sutta</title>
  <link href="../Styles/bottomnav.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
  <link href="../Styles/main.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
  <link href="../Styles/suttaref.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
</head>

<body>
  <h2 class="h2-paritta">Maṅgala-sutta<a id="mangala-sutta"></a></h2>

  <p class="pali-leader">〈 Evaṁ me sutaṁ&#160;〉</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Ekaṁ samayaṁ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. Atha kho aññatarā devatā abhikkantāya rattiyā abhikkantavaṇṇā kevalakappaṁ jetavanaṁ obhāsetvā yena bhagavā ten'upasaṅkami. Upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā ekam'antaṁ aṭṭhāsi. Ekam'antaṁ ṭhitā kho sā devatā bhagavantaṁ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi:</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's Park. Then, when the night had advanced, a certain deity of stunning beauty, having illuminated the entire Jeta's Grove, approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, stood to one side, and addressed the Blessed One in verse:</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Bahū devā manussā ca</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Maṅgalāni acintayuṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Ākaṅkhamānā sotthānaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Brūhi maṅgalam'uttamaṁ</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Many devas and human beings</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Have reflected on blessings,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Longing for safety,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">So declare the highest blessing.</p>

  <p class="pali-leader">〈 Asevanā ca bālānaṁ&#160;〉</p>

  Paṇḍitānañ'ca sevanā 

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Pūjā ca pūjanīyānaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etam'maṅgalam'uttamaṁ</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Not associating with fools,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Associating with the wise,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">And venerating those worthy of veneration:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">This is the highest blessing.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Paṭirūpa-desa-vāso ca</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Pubbe ca kata-puññatā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Atta-sammā-paṇidhi ca</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etam'maṅgalam'uttamaṁ</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Residing in a suitable place</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Merit done in the past</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">And directing oneself rightly</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">This is the highest blessing</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Bāhu-saccañ'ca sippañ'ca</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Vinayo ca susikkhito</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Subhāsitā ca yā vācā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etam'maṅgalam'uttamaṁ</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Much learning, a craft,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">A well-trained discipline,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">And well-spoken speech:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">This is the highest blessing.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Mātā-pitu-upaṭṭhānaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Putta-dārassa saṅgaho</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Anākulā ca kammantā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etam'maṅgalam'uttamaṁ</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Serving one's mother and father,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Maintaining a wife and children,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">And an honest occupation:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">This is the highest blessing.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Dānañ'ca dhamma-cariyā ca</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Ñātakānañ'ca saṅgaho</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Anavajjāni kammāni</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etam'maṅgalam'uttamaṁ</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Giving and righteous conduct,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Assistance to relatives,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Blameless deeds:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">This is the highest blessing.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Āratī viratī pāpā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Majja-pānā ca saññamo</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Appamādo ca dhammesu</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etam'maṅgalam'uttamaṁ</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Desisting and abstaining from evil,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Refraining from intoxicating drink,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Heedfulness in good qualities:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">This is the highest blessing.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Gāravo ca nivāto ca</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Santuṭṭhī ca kataññutā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Kālena dhammassavanaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etam'maṅgalam'uttamaṁ</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Reverence and humility,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Contentment and gratitude,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Timely listening to the Dhamma:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">This is the highest blessing.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Khantī ca sovacassatā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Samaṇānañ'ca dassanaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Kālena dhamma-sākacchā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etam'maṅgalam'uttamaṁ</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Patience, being amenable to advice,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">The seeing of ascetics,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Timely discussion on the Dhamma:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">This is the highest blessing.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Tapo ca brahmacariyañ'ca</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Ariya-saccāna-dassanaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Nibbāna-sacchikiriyā ca</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etam'maṅgalam'uttamaṁ</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Austerity and the holy life,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Seeing of the noble truths,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">And realization of Nibbāna:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">This is the highest blessing.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Phuṭṭhassa loka-dhammehi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Cittaṁ yassa na kampati</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Asokaṁ virajaṁ khemaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etam'maṅgalam'uttamaṁ</p>

  <p class="english-hang">One whose mind does not shake</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">When touched by worldly conditions,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Sorrowless, dust-free, secure:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">This is the highest blessing.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Etādisāni katvāna</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sabbattham-aparājitā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sabbattha sotthiṁ gacchanti</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tan'tesaṁ maṅgalam'uttaman'ti</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Those who have done these things</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Are victorious everywhere;</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Everywhere they go safely:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Theirs is that highest blessing.</p>

  <div class="suttaref">
    <p class="pali-hang">[Snp 2.4]</p>
  </div>
</body>
</html>