<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Nama-kāra-siddhi-gāthā</title>
  <link href="../Styles/bottomnav.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
  <link href="../Styles/main.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
  <link href="../Styles/suttaref.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
</head>

<body>
  <h2 class="h2-paritta">Nama-kāra-siddhi-gāthā<a id="nama-kara-siddhi-gatha"></a></h2>

  <p class="pali-leader">〈 Yo cakkhumā moha-malāpakaṭṭho&#160;〉</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Sāmaṁ va buddho sugato vimutto</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Mārassa pāsā vinimocayanto</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Pāpesi khemaṁ janataṁ vineyyaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Buddhaṁ varan'taṁ sirasā namāmi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Lokassa nāthañ'ca vināyakañ'ca</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tan'tejasā te jaya-siddhi hotu</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sabb'antarāyā ca vināsamentu</p>

  <p class="english-hang">The One with Vision, with the stain of delusion removed,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Self-awakened, Well-Gone, &amp; Released,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Freed from the snares of Mortal Temptation,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">He caused tameable people to reach security.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">I pay homage with my head to that excellent Buddha, the Protector &amp; Mentor for the world,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By the power of this, may you have triumph &amp; success,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">And may all your dangers be destroyed.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Dhammo dhajo yo viya tassa satthu</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Dassesi lokassa visuddhi-maggaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Niyyāniko dhamma-dharassa dhārī</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sāt'āvaho santi-karo suciṇṇo</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Dhammaṁ varan'taṁ sirasā namāmi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Mohappadālaṁ upasanta-dāhaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tan'tejasā te jaya-siddhi hotu</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sabb'antarāyā ca vināsamentu</p>

  <p class="english-hang">The Teacher's Dhamma, like a banner,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Shows the path of purity to the world.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Leading out, upholding those who uphold it</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Rightly accomplished, it brings pleasure, makes peace.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">I pay homage with my head to that excellent Dhamma,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Which pierces delusion and makes fever grow calm.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By the power of this, may you have triumph &amp; success,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">And may all your dangers be destroyed.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Saddhamma-senā sugat'ānugo yo</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Lokassa pāp'ūpakilesa-jetā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Santo sayaṁ santi-niyojako ca</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Svākkhāta-dhammaṁ viditaṁ karoti</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Saṅghaṁ varan'taṁ sirasā namāmi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Buddh'ānubuddhaṁ sama-sīla-diṭṭhiṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tan'tejasā te jaya-siddhi hotu</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sabb'antarāyā ca vināsamentu</p>

  <p class="english-hang">The True Dhamma's army, following the One Well-Gone,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Is victor over the evils &amp; corruptions of the world.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Virtuous, unifying itself in peace,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">And makes the well-taught Dhamma be known.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">I pay homage with my head to that excellent Saṅgha,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Awakened after the Awakened, harmonious in virtue &amp; view.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By the power of this, may you have triumph &amp; success,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">And may all your dangers be destroyed.</p>

  <div class="suttaref">
    <p class="pali-hang">[Thai]</p>
  </div>
</body>
</html>