<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title></title>
</head>

<body>
  <h3>Ratana-sutta<a id="ratana-sutta"></a></h3>

  <center>〈 Yānīdha bhūtāni samāgatāni 〉</center>

  Bhummāni vā yāni va antalikkhe<br/>

  Sabb'eva bhūtā sumanā bhavantu<br/>

  Atho'pi sakkacca suṇantu bhāsitaṁ 

  <div class="english">
    <blockquote>
      <p>Whatever beings are gathered here,<br/> Whether of the earth or in the sky,<br/> May all beings indeed be happy<br/> And then listen carefully to what is said.</p>
    </blockquote>
  </div>

  <p>Tasmā hi bhūtā nisāmetha sabbe<br/> Mettaṁ karotha mānusiyā pajāya<br/> Divā ca ratto ca haranti ye baliṁ<br/> Tasmā hi ne rakkhatha appamattā</p>

  <div class="english">
    <blockquote>
      <p>Therefore, O beings, all of you listen;<br/> Show loving-kindness to the human population,<br/> Who day and night bring you offerings;<br/> Therefore, being heedful, protect them.</p>
    </blockquote>
  </div>

  <p>Yaṅ kiñci vittaṁ idha vā huraṁ vā<br/> Saggesu vā yaṁ ratanaṁ paṇītaṁ<br/> Na no samaṁ atthi tathāgatena<br/> Idam'pi buddhe ratanaṁ paṇītaṁ<br/> Etena saccena suvatthi hotu</p>

  <div class="english">
    <blockquote>
      <p>Whatever the treasures are here or beyond,<br/> Whatever the precious jewel in the heavens,<br/> There is none equal to the Thus-gone.<br/> In the Buddha is this sublime jewel.<br/> By this truth, may there be well-being.</p>
    </blockquote>
  </div>

  <p>Khayaṁ virāgaṁ amataṁ paṇītaṁ<br/> Yad'ajjhagā sakya-munī samāhito<br/> Na tena dhammena sam'atthi kiñci<br/> Idam'pi dhamme ratanaṁ paṇītaṁ<br/> Etena saccena suvatthi hotu</p>

  <div class="english">
    <blockquote>
      <p>Destruction, dispassion, the deathless, the sublime,<br/> Which Sakyamuni, concentrated, attained:<br/> There is nothing equal to that Dhamma.<br/> This too is the sublime gem in the Dhamma:<br/> By this truth, may there be safety!</p>
    </blockquote>
  </div>

  <p>Yam'buddha-seṭṭho parivaṇṇayī suciṁ<br/> Samādhim'ānantarikañ'ñam'āhu<br/> Samādhinā tena samo na vijjati<br/> Idam'pi dhamme ratanaṁ paṇītaṁ<br/> Etena saccena suvatthi hotu</p>

  <div class="english">
    <blockquote>
      <p>The purity that the supreme Buddha praised,<br/> Which they call concentration without interval<br/> The equal of that concentration does not exist.<br/> This too is the sublime gem in the Dhamma:<br/> By this truth, may there be safety!</p>
    </blockquote>
  </div>

  <p>Ye puggalā aṭṭha sataṁ pasatthā<br/> Cattāri etāni yugāni honti<br/> Te dakkhiṇeyyā sugatassa sāvakā<br/> Etesu dinnāni mahapphalāni<br/> Idam'pi saṅghe ratanaṁ paṇītaṁ<br/> Etena saccena suvatthi hotu</p>

  <div class="english">
    <blockquote>
      <p>The eight persons praised by the good<br/> Constitute these four pairs.<br/> These, worthy of offerings, are the Fortunate One's disciples;<br/> Gifts given to them yield abundant fruit.<br/> This too is the sublime gem in the Sangha:<br/> By this truth, may there be safety!</p>
    </blockquote>
  </div>

  <p>Ye suppayuttā manasā daḷhena<br/> Nikkāmino gotama-sāsanamhi<br/> Te patti-pattā amataṁ vigayha<br/> Laddhā mudhā nibbutiṁ bhuñjamānā<br/> Idam'pi saṅghe ratanaṁ paṇītaṁ<br/> Etena saccena suvatthi hotu</p>

  <div class="english">
    <blockquote>
      <p>Those who strived well with a firm mind,<br/> Who are desireless in Gotama's teaching,<br/> Have reached attainment, having plunged into the deathless,<br/> Enjoying perfect peace obtained free of charge.<br/> This too is the sublime gem in the Sangha:<br/> By this truth, may there be safety!</p>
    </blockquote>
  </div>

  <p>Yath'inda-khīlo paṭhaviṁ sito siyā<br/> Catubbhi vātebhi asampakampiyo<br/> Tath'ūpamaṁ sappurisaṁ vadāmi<br/> Yo ariya-saccāni avecca passati<br/> Idam'pi saṅghe ratanaṁ paṇītaṁ<br/> Etena saccena suvatthi hotu</p>

  <div class="english">
    <blockquote>
      <p>As a gate post, planted in the ground,<br/> Would be unshakable by the four winds,<br/> Similarly I speak of the good person<br/> Who, having experienced them, sees the noble truths.<br/> This too is the sublime gem in the Sangha:<br/> By this truth, may there be safety!</p>
    </blockquote>
  </div>

  <p>Ye ariya-saccāni vibhāvayanti<br/> Gambhīra-paññena sudesitāni<br/> Kiñ'c'āpi te honti bhusa'ppamattā<br/> Na te bhavaṁ aṭṭhamam'ādiyanti<br/> Idam'pi saṅghe ratanaṁ paṇītaṁ<br/> Etena saccena suvatthi hotu</p>

  <div class="english">
    <blockquote>
      <p>Those who have cognized the noble truths<br/> Well taught by the one of deep wisdom,<br/> Even if they are extremely heedless,<br/> Do not take an eighth existence.<br/> This too is the sublime gem in the Sangha:<br/> By this truth, may there be safety!</p>
    </blockquote>
  </div>

  <p>Sahā v'assa dassana-sampadāya<br/> Tay'assu dhammā jahitā bhavanti<br/> Sakkāya-diṭṭhi vicikicchitañ'ca<br/> Sīlabbataṁ vā pi yad'atthi kiñci<br/> Catūh'apāyehi ca vippamutto<br/> Cha c'ābhiṭhānāni abhabbo kātuṁ<br/> Idam'pi saṅghe ratanaṁ paṇītaṁ<br/> Etena saccena suvatthi hotu</p>

  <div class="english">
    <blockquote>
      <p>Together with one's achievement of vision<br/> Three things are discarded:<br/> The view of the personal entity and doubt,<br/> And whatever good behavior and observances there are.<br/> One is also freed from the four planes of misery<br/> And is incapable of doing six deeds.<br/> This too is the sublime gem in the Sangha:<br/> By this truth, may there be safety!</p>
    </blockquote>
  </div>

  <p>Kiñ'c'āpi so kammaṁ karoti pāpakaṁ<br/> Kāyena vācā uda cetasā vā<br/> Abhabbo so tassa paṭicchadāya<br/> Abhabbatā diṭṭha-padassa vuttā<br/> Idam'pi saṅghe ratanaṁ paṇītaṁ<br/> Etena saccena suvatthi hotu</p>

  <div class="english">
    <blockquote>
      <p>Although one does a bad deed<br/> By body, speech, or mind,<br/> One is incapable of concealing it;<br/> Such inability is stated for one who has seen the state.<br/> This too is the sublime gem in the Sangha:<br/> By this truth, may there be safety!</p>
    </blockquote>
  </div>

  <p>Vanappagumbe yathā phussi't'agge<br/> Gimhāna-māse paṭhamasmiṁ gimhe<br/> Tath'ūpamaṁ dhamma-varaṁ adesayi<br/> Nibbāna-gāmiṁ paramaṁ hitāya<br/> Idam'pi buddhe ratanaṁ paṇītaṁ<br/> Etena saccena suvatthi hotu</p>

  <div class="english">
    <blockquote>
      <p>Like a woodland thicket with flowering crests<br/> In a summer month, in the first of the summer,<br/> Just so he taught the excellent Dhamma,<br/> Leading to nibbāna, for the supreme welfare.<br/> This too is the sublime gem in the Buddha:<br/> By this truth, may there be safety!</p>
    </blockquote>
  </div>

  <p>Varo varaññū vara-do var'āharo<br/> Anuttaro dhamma-varaṁ adesayi<br/> Idam'pi buddhe ratanaṁ paṇītaṁ</p>

  <div class="english">
    <blockquote>
      <p>The excellent one, knower of the excellent,<br/> Giver of the excellent, bringer of the excellent,<br/> The unsurpassed one taught the excellent Dhamma.<br/> This too is the sublime gem in the Buddha:<br/> By this truth, may there be safety!</p>
    </blockquote>
  </div>

  <p>Khīṇaṁ purāṇaṁ navaṁ n'atthi sambhavaṁ<br/> Viratta-citt'āyatike bhavasmiṁ<br/> Te khīṇa-bījā aviruḷhi-chandā<br/> Nibbanti dhīrā yathā'yam padīpo<br/> Idam'pi saṅghe ratanaṁ paṇītaṁ<br/> Etena saccena suvatthi hotu</p>

  <div class="english">
    <blockquote>
      <p>The old is destroyed, there is no new origination,<br/> Their minds are dispassionate toward future existence.<br/> With seeds destroyed, with no desire for growth,<br/> Those wise ones are extinguished like this lamp.<br/> This too is the sublime gem in the Sangha:<br/> By this truth, may there be safety!</p>
    </blockquote>
  </div>

  <p>Yān'īdha bhūtāni samāgatāni<br/> Bhummāni vā yāni va antalikkhe<br/> Tathāgataṁ deva-manussa-pūjitaṁ<br/> Buddhaṁ namassāma suvatthi hotu</p>

  <div class="english">
    <blockquote>
      <p>Whatever beings are gathered here,<br/> Whether of the earth or in the sky,<br/> We pay homage to the thus-gone Buddha,<br/> Venerated by devas and humans: may there be safety!</p>
    </blockquote>
  </div>

  <p>Yān'īdha bhūtāni samāgatāni<br/> Bhummāni vā yāni va antalikkhe<br/> Tathāgataṁ deva-manussa-pūjitaṁ<br/> Dhammaṁ namassāma suvatthi hotu</p>

  <div class="english">
    <blockquote>
      <p>Whatever beings are gathered here,<br/> Whether of the earth or in the sky,<br/> We pay homage to the thus-gone Dhamma,<br/> Venerated by devas and humans: may there be safety!</p>
    </blockquote>
  </div>

  <p>Yān'īdha bhūtāni samāgatāni<br/> Bhummāni vā yāni va antalikkhe<br/> Tathāgataṁ deva-manussa-pūjitaṁ<br/> Saṅghaṁ namassāma suvatthi hotu</p>

  <div class="english">
    <blockquote>
      <p>Whatever beings are gathered here,<br/> Whether of the earth or in the sky,<br/> We pay homage to the thus-gone Sangha,<br/> Venerated by devas and humans: may there be safety!</p>
    </blockquote>
  </div>

  <p style="text-align:right;">[Snp 2.1]</p>
</body>
</html>