<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title>The Discourse on Setting in Motion the Wheel of Dhamma</title>
  <link href="../Styles/bottomnav.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
  <link href="../Styles/main.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
  <link href="../Styles/suttaref.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
</head>

<body>
  <h2><a style="font-style:normal;" href="schedule.xhtml">The Discourse on Setting in Motion the Wheel of Dhamma</a><a id="wheel-of-dhamma-full"></a></h2>

  <hr/>

  <p class="pali-leader">〈 Thus Have I Heard&#160;〉</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Bārāṇasī &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> in the Deer Park at Isipatana. There the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus of the group of five thus:</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">Bhikkhus these two extremes should not be followed by one who has gone forth into homelessness. What two? The pursuit of sensual happiness in sensual pleasures &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> which is low &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> vulgar &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> the way of worldlings &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> ignoble &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> unbeneficial &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and the pursuit of self-mortification &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> which is painful &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> ignoble &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> unbeneficial.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">Without veering towards either of these extremes &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> the Tathāgata has awakened to the middle way &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> which gives rise to vision &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> which gives rise to knowledge &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> which leads to peace &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> to direct knowledge &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> to enlightenment &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> to Nibbāna.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">And what &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> bhikkhus &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> is the Middle Way awakened to by the Tathāgata which gives rise to vision &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> which gives rise to knowledge &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> which leads to peace &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> to direct knowledge &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> to enlightenment &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> to Nibbāna.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">It is this Noble Eightfold Path:</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">That Is &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> Right View &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> Right Intention &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> Right Speech &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> Right Action &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> Right Livelihood &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> Right Effort &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> Right Mindfulness &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> Right Concentration.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">This &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> bhikkhus &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> is that middle way awakened to by the Tathāgata &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> which gives rise to vision &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> which gives rise to knowledge &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> which leads to peace &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> to direct knowledge &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> to enlightenment &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> to Nibbāna.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">Now this &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> bhikkhus &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> is the noble truth of suffering: birth is suffering &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> ageing is suffering &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> illness is suffering &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> death is suffering &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> union with what is displeasing is suffering &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> separation from what is pleasing is suffering &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> not to get what one wants is suffering &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> in brief &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> the five aggregates subject to clinging are suffering.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">Now this &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> bhikkhus &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> is the noble truth of the origin of suffering: it is this craving which leads to renewed existence &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> accompanied by delight and lust &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> seeking delight here and there &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> that is &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> craving for sensual pleasures &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> craving for existence &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> craving for extermination.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">Now this &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> bhikkhus &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> is the noble truth of the cessation of suffering: it is the remainderless fading away and cessation of that same craving &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> the giving up and relinquishing of it &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> freedom from it &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> nonreliance on it.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">Now this &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> bhikkhus &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> is the noble truth of the way leading to the cessation of suffering: It is this Noble Eightfold Path;</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">That Is &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> Right View &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> Right Intention &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> Right Speech &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> Right Action &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> Right Livelihood &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> Right Effort &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> Right Mindfulness &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> Right Concentration.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">This is the noble truth of suffering': thus &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> bhikkhus &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> in regard to things unheard before &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> there arose in me vision &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> knowledge &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> wisdom &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> true knowledge &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and light.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">This noble truth of suffering is to be fully understood': thus &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> bhikkhus &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> in regard to things unheard before &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> there arose in me vision &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> knowledge &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> wisdom &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> true knowledge &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and light.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">This noble truth of suffering has been fully understood': thus &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> bhikkhus &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> in regard to things unheard before &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> there arose in me vision &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> knowledge &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> wisdom &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> true knowledge &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and light.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">This is the noble truth of the origin of suffering': thus &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> bhikkhus &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> in regard to things unheard before &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> there arose in me vision &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> knowledge &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> wisdom &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> true knowledge &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and light.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">This noble truth of the origin of suffering is to be abandoned': thus &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> bhikkhus &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> in regard to things unheard before &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> there arose in me vision &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> knowledge &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> wisdom &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> true knowledge &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and light.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">This noble truth of the origin of suffering has been abandoned': thus &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> bhikkhus &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> in regard to things unheard before &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> there arose in me vision &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> knowledge &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> wisdom &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> true knowledge &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and light.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">This is the noble truth of the cessation of suffering': thus &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> bhikkhus &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> in regard to things unheard before &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> there arose in me vision &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> knowledge &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> wisdom &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> true knowledge &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and light.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">This noble truth of the cessation of suffering is to be realized': thus &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> bhikkhus &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> in regard to things unheard before &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> there arose in me vision &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> knowledge &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> wisdom &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> true knowledge &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and light.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">This noble truth of the cessation of suffering has been realized': thus &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> bhikkhus &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> in regard to things unheard before &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> there arose in me vision &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> knowledge &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> wisdom &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> true knowledge &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and light.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">This is the noble truth of the way leading to the cessation of suffering': thus &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> bhikkhus &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> in regard to things unheard before &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> there arose in me vision &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> knowledge &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> wisdom &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> true knowledge &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and light.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">This noble truth of the way leading to the cessation of suffering is to be developed': thus &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> bhikkhus &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> in regard to things unheard before &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> there arose in me vision &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> knowledge &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> wisdom &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> true knowledge &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and light.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">This noble truth of the way leading to the cessation of suffering has been developed': thus &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> bhikkhus &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> in regard to things unheard before &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> there arose in me vision &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> knowledge &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> wisdom &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> true knowledge &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and light.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">So long &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> bhikkhus &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> as my knowledge and vision of these Four Noble Truths as they really are in their three phases and twelve aspects was not thoroughly purified in this way &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> I did not claim to have awakened to the unsurpassed perfect enlightenment in this world with its devas &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> Māra &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and Brahmā &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> in this generation with its ascetics and brahmins &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> its devas and humans.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">But when my knowledge and vision of these Four Noble Truths as they really are in their three phases and twelve aspects was thoroughly purified in this way &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> then I claimed to have awakened to the unsurpassed perfect enlightenment in this world with its devas &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> Māra &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and Brahmā &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> in this generation with its ascetics and brahmins &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> its devas and humans.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">This is what the Blessed One said. Elated &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> the bhikkhus of the group of five delighted in the Blessed One's statement.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">And while this discourse was being spoken &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> there arose in the Venerable Kondañña the dust-free &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> stainless vision of the Dhamma:</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">“Whatever is subject to origination is all subject to cessation.”</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">And when the Wheel of the Dhamma had been set in motion by the Blessed One,&#160;the earth-dwelling devas raised a cry:</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">“At Bārāṇasī in the Deer Park at Isipatana &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> this unsurpassed Wheel of the Dhamma has been set in motion by the Blessed One &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> which cannot be stopped by any ascetic or brahmin or deva or Māra or Brahmā or by anyone in the world.”</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">Having heard the cry of the earth-dwelling devas &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> the devas of the realm of the Four Great Kings raised a cry...</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">Having heard the cry of the devas of the realm of the Four Great Kings &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> the Tāvatiṁsa devas raised a cry...</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">Having heard the cry of the Tāvatiṁsa devas &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> the Yāma devas raised a cry...</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">Having heard the cry of the Yāma devas &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> the Tusita devas raised a cry...</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">Having heard the cry of the Tusita devas &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> the Nimmānaratī devas raised a cry...</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">Having heard the cry of the Nimmānaratī devas &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> the Paranimmitavasavattī devas raised a cry...</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">Having heard the cry of the Paranimmitavasavattī devas &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> the devas of Brahmā's company raised a cry:</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">“At Bārāṇasī in the Deer Park at Isipatana &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> this unsurpassed Wheel of the Dhamma has been set in motion by the Blessed One &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> which cannot be stopped by any ascetic or brahmin or deva or Māra or Brahmā or by anyone in the world.”</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">Thus at that moment &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> at that instant &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> at that second &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> the cry spread as far as the brahmā world &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and this ten thousandfold world system shook &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> quaked &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and trembled &#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> and an immeasurable glorious radiance appeared in the world surpassing the divine majesty of the devas.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">Then the Blessed One uttered this inspired utterance:</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">“Koṇḍañña has indeed understood! Koṇḍañña has indeed understood!”</p>

  <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">In this way the Venerable Koṇḍañña acquired the name “Aññā Koṇḍañña—Koṇḍañña Who Has Understood.”</p>

  <div class="suttaref">
    <p class="pali-hang" style="font-style: italic;">[SN 56.11]</p>
  </div>
</body>
</html>