<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Endnotes</title>
  <link href="../Styles/bottomnav.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
  <link href="../Styles/main.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
  <link href="../Styles/suttaref.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
</head>

<body>
&#x1f16d; &#x1f16f; &#x1f10f; &#x0229c;


cbnd
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
You are free to:
• Share — copy and redistribute the material in any medium or format.
The licensor cannot revoke these freedoms as long as you follow the license
terms listed below:
• Attribution — You must give appropriate credit, provide a link to the
license, and indicate if changes were made. You may do so in any
reasonable manner, but not in any way that suggests the licensor
endorses you or your use.
• NonCommercial — You may not use the material for commercial
purposes.
• NoDerivatives — If you remix, transform, or build upon the material,
you may not distribute the modified material.
No additional restrictions — You may not apply legal terms or technological
measures that legally restrict others from doing anything the license permits.
You do not have to comply with the license for elements of the material in
the public domain or where your use is permitted by an applicable exception
or limitation.
No warranties are given. The license may not give you all of the permissions
necessary for your intended use. For example, other rights such as publicity,
privacy, or moral rights may limit how you use the material.

</body>
</html>