<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Undertaking the Eight Trainings</title>
  <link href="../Styles/main.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
  <link href="../Styles/suttaref.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
</head>

<body>
  <div class="section-title">
    Undertaking the Eight Trainings
  </div>

  <p style="text-align:center;">(Repeat each phrase after the leader)</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Pāṇ&#8217;ātipātā veramaṇi-sikkhāpadaṁ samādiyāmi</p>

  <p class="english-hang">I undertake the training to refrain from taking the life of any living being.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Adinn&#8217;ādānā veramaṇi-sikkhāpadaṁ samādiyāmi</p>

  <p class="english-hang">I undertake the training to refrain from taking that which is not given.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Abrahmacariyā veramaṇi-sikkhāpadaṁ samādiyāmi</p>

  <p class="english-hang">I undertake the training to refrain from any intentional sexual activity.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Musāvādā veramaṇi-sikkhāpadaṁ samādiyāmi</p>

  <p class="english-hang">I undertake the training to refrain from lying.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Surā-meraya-majja-pamāda-ṭṭhānā veramaṇi-sikkhāpadaṁ samādiyāmi</p>

  <p class="english-hang">I undertake the training to refrain from consuming intoxicating drink and drugs that<a id="en157" href="endnotes.xhtml#en157appendix"><sup>157</sup></a> lead to carelessness.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Vikāla-bhojanā veramaṇi-sikkhāpadaṁ samādiyāmi</p>

  <p class="english-hang">I undertake the training to refrain from eating after noon.<a id="en158" href="endnotes.xhtml#en158appendix"><sup>158</sup></a></p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Nacca-gīta-vādita-visūka-dassanā mālā-gandha-vilepana-dhāraṇa-maṇḍana-vibhūsana-ṭṭhānā veramaṇi-sikkhāpadaṁ samādiyāmi</p>

  <p class="english-hang">I undertake the training to refrain from dancing, singing, music and seeing entertainments; from wearing garlands, using perfumes, and beautifying the body with cosmetics.<a id="en159" href="endnotes.xhtml#en159appendix"><sup>159</sup></a></p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Uccāsayana-mahāsayanā veramaṇi-sikkhāpadaṁ samādiyāmi</p>

  <p class="english-hang">I undertake the training to refrain from lying on a high or luxurious sleeping place.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Imāni aṭṭha sikkhāpadāni samādiyāmi [3x]</p>

  <p class="english-hang">I undertake these Eight Trainings.</p>

  <p class="pali-leader">〈 Imāni aṭṭha sikkhāpadāni sīlena sugatiṁ yanti sīlena bhogasampadā sīlena nibbutiṁ yanti tasmā sīlaṁ visodhaye&#160;〉</p>

  <p class="english-hang">These Eight Trainings</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">have virtue as a vehicle for happiness,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">have virtue as a vehicle wealth,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">have virtue as a vehicle for liberation.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Therefore let virtue be purified.<a id="en160" href="endnotes.xhtml#en160appendix"><sup>160</sup></a></p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Sādhu, sādhu, sādhu</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Well done, well done, well done.</p>

  <p style="text-align:center;">(Bow 3x)</p>
</body>
</html>