<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Protective Recitations</title>
  <link href="../Styles/bottomnav.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
  <link href="../Styles/main.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
  <link href="../Styles/suttaref.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
</head>

<body>
  <h2 class="h2-paritta"><a style="font-style:normal;" href="schedule.xhtml">Devā-ārādhanā</a><a id="deva-aradhana"></a></h2>

  <p class="pali-leader">〈 Pharitvāna<a id="en144" href="endnotes.xhtml#en144appendix"><sup>144</sup></a> mettaṁ samettā bhadantā<br/> Avikkhitta-cittā parittaṁ bhaṇantu<br/> Sagge kāme ca rūpe giri-sikhara-taṭe c&#8217;antalikkhe vimāne<br/> Dīpe raṭṭhe ca gāme taru-vana-gahane geha-vatthumhi khette<br/> Bhummā c&#8217;āyantu devā jala-thala-visame yakkha-gandhabba-nāgā<br/> Tiṭṭhantā santike yaṁ muni-vara-vacanaṁ sādhavo me suṇantu<br/> Buddha-dassana-kālo ayam&#8217;bhadantā<br/> Dhamma-ssavana-kālo ayam&#8217;bhadantā<a id="en145" href="endnotes.xhtml#en145appendix"><sup>145</sup></a><br/> Saṅgha-payirupāsana-kālo ayam&#8217;bhadantā<a id="en146" href="endnotes.xhtml#en146appendix"><sup>146</sup></a>&#160;〉</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Kind, venerable sirs: having spread thoughts of good will,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Recite the protective chant with undistracted mind.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Those in the heavens of sensuality &amp; form,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">On peaks &amp; mountain precipices, in palaces floating in the sky,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">In islands, countries, &amp; towns,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">In groves of trees &amp; thickets,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Around homesites &amp; fields.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">And the earth-devas, spirits, heavenly minstrels, &amp; nāgas who are nearby,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">In different waters and lands:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">May they come &amp; listen with approval as I recite the word of the excellent sage.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">This is the time to see the Buddha, venerable sirs. This is the time to listen to the Dhamma, venerable sirs.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">This is the time to attend to the Saṅgha, venerable sirs.</p>

  <div class="suttaref">
    <p>[Thai]</p>
  </div>

  <h2 class="h2-paritta" id="sigil_toc_id_7"><a style="font-style:normal;" href="schedule.xhtml">Pubba-bhāga-nama-kāra-pāṭho</a><a id="pubba-bhaga-nama-kara-patho-protective"></a></h2>

  <p class="pali-hang">〈 Namo tassa&#160;〉 bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa [3x]</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Homage to the Blessed, Worthy, and Perfectly Enlightened One</p>

  <div class="suttaref">
    <p>[DN 21]</p>
  </div>

  <h2 class="h2-paritta" id="sigil_toc_id_8"><a style="font-style:normal;" href="schedule.xhtml">Saraṇa-gamana-pāṭho</a><a id="sarana-gamana-patho"></a></h2>

  <p class="pali-hang">〈 Buddhaṁ&#160;〉 saraṇaṁ gacchāmi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Dhammaṁ saraṇaṁ gacchāmi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Saṅghaṁ saraṇaṁ gacchāmi</p>

  <p class="english-hang">To the Buddha I go for refuge.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">To the Dhamma I go for refuge.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">To the Saṅgha I go for refuge.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Dutiyam&#8217;pi buddhaṁ saraṇaṁ gacchāmi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Dutiyam&#8217;pi dhammaṁ saraṇaṁ gacchāmi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Dutiyam&#8217;pi saṅghaṁ saraṇaṁ gacchāmi</p>

  <p class="english-hang">A second time, to the Buddha I go for refuge.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">A second time, to the Dhamma I go for refuge.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">A second time, to the Saṅgha I go for refuge.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Tatiyam&#8217;pi buddhaṁ saraṇaṁ gacchāmi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tatiyam&#8217;pi dhammaṁ saraṇaṁ gacchāmi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tatiyam&#8217;pi saṅghaṁ saraṇaṁ gacchāmi</p>

  <p class="english-hang">A third time, to the Buddha I go for refuge.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">A third time, to the Dhamma I go for refuge.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">A third time, to the Saṅgha I go for refuge.</p>

  <div class="suttaref">
    <p>[Khp 1.1]</p>
  </div>

  <h2 class="h2-paritta" id="sigil_toc_id_9"><a style="font-style:normal;" href="schedule.xhtml">Nama-kāra-siddhi-gāthā</a><a id="nama-kara-siddhi-gatha"></a></h2>

  <p class="pali-hang">〈 Yo cakkhumā&#160;〉 moha-malāpakaṭṭho</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sāmaṁ va buddho sugato vimutto</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Mārassa pāsā vinimocayanto</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Pāpesi khemaṁ janataṁ vineyyaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Buddhaṁ varan&#8217;taṁ sirasā namāmi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Lokassa nāthañ&#8217;ca vināyakañ&#8217;ca</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tan&#8217;tejasā te jaya-siddhi hotu</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sabb&#8217;antarāyā ca vināsam'entu</p>

  <p class="english-hang">The One with Vision, with the stain of delusion removed,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Self-awakened, Well-Gone, &amp; Released,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Freed from the snares of Mortal Temptation,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">He caused tameable people to reach security.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">I pay homage with my head to that excellent Buddha, the Protector &amp; Mentor for the world,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By the power of this, may you have triumph &amp; success,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">And may all your dangers be destroyed.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Dhammo dhajo yo viya tassa satthu</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Dassesi lokassa visuddhi-maggaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Niyyāniko dhamma-dharassa dhārī</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sāt&#8217;āvaho santi-karo suciṇṇo</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Dhammaṁ varan&#8217;taṁ sirasā namāmi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Moha-ppadālaṁ upasanta-dāhaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tan&#8217;tejasā te jaya-siddhi hotu</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sabb&#8217;antarāyā ca vināsam'entu</p>

  <p class="english-hang">The Teacher&#8217;s Dhamma, like a banner,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Shows the path of purity to the world.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Leading out, upholding those who uphold it</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Rightly accomplished, it brings pleasure, makes peace.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">I pay homage with my head to that excellent Dhamma,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Which pierces delusion and makes fever grow calm.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By the power of this, may you have triumph &amp; success,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">And may all your dangers be destroyed.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Saddhamma-senā sugat&#8217;ānugo yo</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Lokassa pāp&#8217;ūpakilesa-jetā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Santo sayaṁ santi-niyojako ca</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Svākkhāta-dhammaṁ viditaṁ karoti</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Saṅghaṁ varan&#8217;taṁ sirasā namāmi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Buddh&#8217;ānubuddhaṁ sama-sīla-diṭṭhiṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tan&#8217;tejasā te jaya-siddhi hotu</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sabb&#8217;antarāyā ca vināsam'entu</p>

  <p class="english-hang">The True Dhamma&#8217;s army, following the One Well-Gone,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Is victor over the evils &amp; corruptions of the world.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Virtuous, unifying itself in peace,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">And makes the well-taught Dhamma be known.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">I pay homage with my head to that excellent Saṅgha,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Awakened after the Awakened, harmonious in virtue &amp; view.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By the power of this, may you have triumph &amp; success,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">And may all your dangers be destroyed.</p>

  <div class="suttaref">
    <p>[Thai]</p>
  </div>

  <h2 class="h2-paritta" id="sigil_toc_id_10"><a style="font-style:normal;" href="schedule.xhtml">Namo-kāra-aṭṭhaka</a><a id="namo-kara-atthaka"></a></h2>

  <p class="pali-hang">〈 Namo arahato&#160;〉 Sammā-</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sambuddhassa mah&#8217;esino</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Namo uttama-dhammassa</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Svākkhātass&#8217;eva ten&#8217;idha</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Homage to the Great Seer, the Worthy One, Perfectly Self-awakened; Homage to the highest Dhamma, well-taught by him here;</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Namo mahā-saṅghassā&#8217;pi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Visuddha-sīla-diṭṭhino</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Namo omāty&#8217;āraddhassa</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Ratanattayassa sādhukaṁ</p>

  <p class="english-hang">And homage to the Great Saṅgha,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Pure in virtue &amp; view.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Homage to the Triple Gem</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Beginning auspiciously with AUM;</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Namo omak&#8217;ātītassa</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tassa vatthuttayassa&#8217;pi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Namo-kāra-ppabhāvena</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Vigacchantu upaddavā</p>

  <p class="english-hang">And homage to those three objects</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">That have left base things behind.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By the potency of this homage,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">May misfortunes disappear;</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Namo-kār&#8217;ānubhāvena</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Suvatthi hotu sabbadā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Namo-kārassa tejena</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Vidhimhi homi tejavā</p>

  <p class="english-hang">By the potency of this homage,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">May there always be well-being;</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By the power of this homage,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">May success in this ceremony be mine.</p>

  <div class="suttaref">
    <p>[Thai]</p>
  </div>

  <h2 class="h2-paritta" id="sigil_toc_id_11"><a style="font-style:normal;" href="schedule.xhtml">Maṅgala-sutta</a><a id="mangala-sutta"></a></h2>

  <p class="pali-hang">〈 Evaṁ me sutaṁ&#160;〉 ekaṁ samayaṁ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. Atha kho aññatarā devatā abhikkantāya rattiyā abhikkantavaṇṇā kevalakappaṁ jetavanaṁ obhāsetvā yena bhagavā ten&#8217;upasaṅkami. Upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṁ abhivādetvā ekam&#8217;antaṁ aṭṭhāsi. Ekam&#8217;antaṁ ṭhitā kho sā devatā bhagavantaṁ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi:</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta&#8217;s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika&#8217;s Park. Then, when the night had advanced, a certain deity of stunning beauty, having illuminated the entire Jeta&#8217;s Grove, approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, stood to one side, and addressed the Blessed One in verse:</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Bahū devā manussā ca</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Maṅgalāni acintayuṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Ākaṅkhamānā sotthānaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Brūhi maṅgalam&#8217;uttamaṁ</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Many devas and human beings</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Have reflected on blessings,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Longing for safety,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">So declare the highest blessing.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Asevanā ca bālānaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Paṇḍitānañ&#8217;ca sevanā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Pūjā ca pūjanīyānaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etam&#8217;maṅgalam&#8217;uttamaṁ</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Not associating with fools,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Associating with the wise,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">And venerating those worthy of veneration:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">This is the highest blessing.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Paṭirūpa-desa-vāso ca</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Pubbe ca kata-puññatā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Atta-sammā-paṇidhi ca</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etam&#8217;maṅgalam&#8217;uttamaṁ</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Residing in a suitable place</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Merit done in the past</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">And directing oneself rightly</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">This is the highest blessing</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Bāhu-saccañ&#8217;ca sippañ&#8217;ca</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Vinayo ca susikkhito</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Subhāsitā ca yā vācā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etam&#8217;maṅgalam&#8217;uttamaṁ</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Much learning, a craft,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">A well-trained discipline,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">And well-spoken speech:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">This is the highest blessing.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Mātā-pitu upaṭṭhānaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Putta-dārassa saṅgaho</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Anākulā ca kammantā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etam&#8217;maṅgalam&#8217;uttamaṁ</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Serving one&#8217;s mother and father,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Maintaining a wife and children,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">And an honest occupation:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">This is the highest blessing.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Dānañ&#8217;ca dhamma-cariyā ca</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Ñātakānañ&#8217;ca saṅgaho</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Anavajjāni kammāni</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etam&#8217;maṅgalam&#8217;uttamaṁ</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Giving and righteous conduct,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Assistance to relatives,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Blameless deeds:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">This is the highest blessing.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Āratī viratī pāpā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Majja-pānā ca saññamo</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Appamādo ca dhammesu</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etam&#8217;maṅgalam&#8217;uttamaṁ</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Desisting and abstaining from evil,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Refraining from intoxicating drink,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Heedfulness in good qualities:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">This is the highest blessing.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Gāravo ca nivāto ca</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Santuṭṭhī ca kataññutā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Kālena dhamma-ssavanaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etam&#8217;maṅgalam&#8217;uttamaṁ</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Reverence and humility,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Contentment and gratitude,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Timely listening to the Dhamma:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">This is the highest blessing.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Khantī ca sovacassatā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Samaṇānañ&#8217;ca dassanaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Kālena dhamma-sākacchā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etam&#8217;maṅgalam&#8217;uttamaṁ</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Patience, being amenable to advice,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">The seeing of ascetics,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Timely discussion on the Dhamma:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">This is the highest blessing.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Tapo ca brahmacariyañ&#8217;ca</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Ariya-saccāna-dassanaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Nibbāna-sacchikiriyā ca</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etam&#8217;maṅgalam&#8217;uttamaṁ</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Austerity and the holy life,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Seeing of the noble truths,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">And realization of Nibbāna:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">This is the highest blessing.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Phuṭṭhassa loka-dhammehi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Cittaṁ yassa na kampati</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Asokaṁ virajaṁ khemaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etam&#8217;maṅgalam&#8217;uttamaṁ</p>

  <p class="english-hang">One whose mind does not shake</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">When touched by worldly conditions,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Sorrowless, dust-free, secure:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">This is the highest blessing.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Etādisāni katvāna</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sabbattham&#8217;aparājitā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sabbattha sotthiṁ gacchanti</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tan&#8217;tesaṁ maṅgalam&#8217;uttaman&#8217;ti</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Those who have done these things</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Are victorious everywhere;</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Everywhere they go safely:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Theirs is that highest blessing.</p>

  <div class="suttaref">
    <p>[Snp 2.4]</p>
  </div>

  <h2 class="h2-paritta" id="sigil_toc_id_12"><a style="font-style:normal;" href="schedule.xhtml">Ratana-sutta</a><a id="ratana-sutta"></a></h2>

  <p class="pali-hang">〈 Yān&#8217;īdha&#160;〉 bhūtāni samāgatāni</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Bhummāni vā yāni va antalikkhe</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sabb&#8217;eva bhūtā sumanā bhavantu</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Atho&#8217;pi sakkacca suṇantu bhāsitaṁ</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Whatever beings are gathered here,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Whether of the earth or in the sky,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">May all beings indeed be happy</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">And then listen carefully to what is said.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Tasmā hi bhūtā nisāmetha sabbe</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Mettaṁ karotha mānusiyā pajāya</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Divā ca ratto ca haranti ye baliṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tasmā hi ne rakkhatha appamattā</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Therefore, O beings, all of you listen;</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Show loving-kindness to the human population,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Who day and night bring you offerings;</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Therefore, being heedful, protect them.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Yaṅ'kiñci vittaṁ idha vā huraṁ vā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Saggesu vā yaṁ ratanaṁ paṇītaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Na no samaṁ atthi tathāgatena</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Idam&#8217;pi buddhe ratanaṁ paṇītaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etena saccena suvatthi hotu</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Whatever the treasures are here or beyond,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Whatever the precious jewel in the heavens,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">There is none equal to the Thus-gone.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">In the Buddha is this sublime jewel.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By this truth, may there be well-being.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Khayaṁ virāgaṁ amataṁ paṇītaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Yad&#8217;ajjhagā sakya-munī samāhito</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Na tena dhammena sam&#8217;atthi kiñci</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Idam&#8217;pi dhamme ratanaṁ paṇītaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etena saccena suvatthi hotu</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Destruction, dispassion, the deathless, the sublime,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Which Sakyamuni, concentrated, attained:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">There is nothing equal to that Dhamma.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">This too is the sublime gem in the Dhamma:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By this truth, may there be safety!</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Yam&#8217;buddha-seṭṭho parivaṇṇayī suciṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Samādhim&#8217;ānantarikañ&#8217;ñam&#8217;āhu</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Samādhinā tena samo na vijjati</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Idam&#8217;pi dhamme ratanaṁ paṇītaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etena saccena suvatthi hotu</p>

  <p class="english-hang">The purity that the supreme Buddha praised,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Which they call concentration without interval</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">The equal of that concentration does not exist.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">This too is the sublime gem in the Dhamma:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By this truth, may there be safety!</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Ye puggalā aṭṭha sataṁ pasatthā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Cattāri etāni yugāni honti</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Te dakkhiṇeyyā sugatassa sāvakā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etesu dinnāni maha-pphalāni</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Idam&#8217;pi saṅghe ratanaṁ paṇītaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etena saccena suvatthi hotu</p>

  <p class="english-hang">The eight persons praised by the good</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Constitute these four pairs.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">These, worthy of offerings, are the Fortunate One&#8217;s disciples;</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Gifts given to them yield abundant fruit.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">This too is the sublime gem in the Sangha:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By this truth, may there be safety!</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Ye suppayuttā manasā daḷhena</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Nikkāmino gotama-sāsanamhi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Te patti-pattā amataṁ vigayha</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Laddhā mudhā nibbutiṁ bhuñjamānā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Idam&#8217;pi saṅghe ratanaṁ paṇītaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etena saccena suvatthi hotu</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Those who strived well with a firm mind,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Who are desireless in Gotama&#8217;s teaching,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Have reached attainment, having plunged into the deathless,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Enjoying perfect peace obtained free of charge.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">This too is the sublime gem in the Sangha:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By this truth, may there be safety!</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Yath&#8217;inda-khīlo paṭhaviṁ sito siyā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Catubbhi vātebhi asampakampiyo</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tath&#8217;ūpamaṁ sappurisaṁ vadāmi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Yo ariya-saccāni avecca passati</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Idam&#8217;pi saṅghe ratanaṁ paṇītaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etena saccena suvatthi hotu</p>

  <p class="english-hang">As a gate post, planted in the ground,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Would be unshakable by the four winds,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Similarly I speak of the good person</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Who, having experienced them, sees the noble truths.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">This too is the sublime gem in the Sangha:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By this truth, may there be safety!</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Ye ariya-saccāni vibhāvayanti</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Gambhīra-paññena sudesitāni</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Kiñ&#8217;c&#8217;āpi te honti bhusa&#8217;ppamattā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Na te bhavaṁ aṭṭhamam&#8217;ādiyanti</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Idam&#8217;pi saṅghe ratanaṁ paṇītaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etena saccena suvatthi hotu</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Those who have cognized the noble truths</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Well taught by the one of deep wisdom,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Even if they are extremely heedless,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Do not take an eighth existence.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">This too is the sublime gem in the Sangha:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By this truth, may there be safety!</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Sahā v&#8217;assa dassana-sampadāya</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tay&#8217;assu dhammā jahitā bhavanti</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sakkāya-diṭṭhi vicikicchitañ&#8217;ca</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sīlabbataṁ vā&#8217;pi yad&#8217;atthi kiñci</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Catūh&#8217;apāyehi ca vippamutto</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Cha c&#8217;ābhiṭhānāni abhabbo kātuṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Idam&#8217;pi saṅghe ratanaṁ paṇītaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etena saccena suvatthi hotu</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Together with one&#8217;s achievement of vision</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Three things are discarded:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">The view of the personal entity and doubt,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">And whatever good behavior and observances there are.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">One is also freed from the four planes of misery</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">And is incapable of doing six deeds.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">This too is the sublime gem in the Sangha:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By this truth, may there be safety!</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Kiñ&#8217;c&#8217;āpi so kammaṁ karoti pāpakaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Kāyena vācā uda cetasā vā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Abhabbo so tassa paṭicchadāya</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Abhabbatā diṭṭha-padassa vuttā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Idam&#8217;pi saṅghe ratanaṁ paṇītaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etena saccena suvatthi hotu</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Although one does a bad deed</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By body, speech, or mind,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">One is incapable of concealing it;</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Such inability is stated for one who has seen the state.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">This too is the sublime gem in the Sangha:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By this truth, may there be safety!</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Vana-ppagumbe yathā phussit&#8217;agge</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Gimhāna-māse paṭhamasmiṁ gimhe</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tath&#8217;ūpamaṁ dhamma-varaṁ adesayi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Nibbāna-gāmiṁ paramaṁ hitāya</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Idam&#8217;pi buddhe ratanaṁ paṇītaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etena saccena suvatthi hotu</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Like a woodland thicket with flowering crests</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">In a summer month, in the first of the summer,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Just so he taught the excellent Dhamma,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Leading to nibbāna, for the supreme welfare.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">This too is the sublime gem in the Buddha:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By this truth, may there be safety!</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Varo varaññū varado var&#8217;āharo</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Anuttaro dhamma-varaṁ adesayi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Idam&#8217;pi buddhe ratanaṁ paṇītaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etena saccena suvatthi hotu</p>

  <p class="english-hang">The excellent one, knower of the excellent,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Giver of the excellent, bringer of the excellent,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">The unsurpassed one taught the excellent Dhamma.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">This too is the sublime gem in the Buddha:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By this truth, may there be safety!</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Khīṇaṁ purāṇaṁ navaṁ n&#8217;atthi sambhavaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Viratta-citt&#8217;āyatike bhavasmiṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Te khīṇa-bījā aviruḷhi-chandā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Nibbanti dhīrā yathā&#8217;yam padīpo</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Idam&#8217;pi saṅghe ratanaṁ paṇītaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etena saccena suvatthi hotu</p>

  <p class="english-hang">The old is destroyed, there is no new origination,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Their minds are dispassionate toward future existence.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">With seeds destroyed, with no desire for growth,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Those wise ones are extinguished like this lamp.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">This too is the sublime gem in the Sangha:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By this truth, may there be safety!</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Yān&#8217;īdha bhūtāni samāgatāni</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Bhummāni vā yāni va antalikkhe</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tathāgataṁ deva-manussa-pūjitaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Buddhaṁ namassāma suvatthi hotu</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Whatever beings are gathered here,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Whether of the earth or in the sky,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">We pay homage to the thus-gone Buddha,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Venerated by devas and humans: may there be safety!</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Yān&#8217;īdha bhūtāni samāgatāni</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Bhummāni vā yāni va antalikkhe</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tathāgataṁ deva-manussa-pūjitaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Dhammaṁ namassāma suvatthi hotu</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Whatever beings are gathered here,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Whether of the earth or in the sky,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">We pay homage to the thus-gone Dhamma,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Venerated by devas and humans: may there be safety!</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Yān&#8217;īdha bhūtāni samāgatāni</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Bhummāni vā yāni va antalikkhe</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tathāgataṁ deva-manussa-pūjitaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Saṅghaṁ namassāma suvatthi hotu</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Whatever beings are gathered here,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Whether of the earth or in the sky,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">We pay homage to the thus-gone Sangha,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Venerated by devas and humans: may there be safety!</p>

  <div class="suttaref">
    <p>[Snp 2.1]</p>
  </div>

  <h2 class="h2-paritta" id="sigil_toc_id_13"><a style="font-style:normal;" href="schedule.xhtml">Karaṇīya-metta-sutta</a><a id="karaniya-metta-sutta"></a></h2>

  <p class="pali-hang">〈 Karaṇīyam&#160;〉 &#8217;attha-kusalena</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Yan&#8217;taṁ santaṁ padaṁ abhisamecca</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sakko ujū ca suhujū ca</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Suvaco c&#8217;assa mudu anatimānī</p>

  <p class="english-hang">This is to be done by one skilled in the beneficial,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Having understood the path of peace.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">He would be able, upright, very upright,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Obedient, gentle, and not conceited.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Santussako ca subharo ca</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Appakicco ca sallahuka-vutti</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sant&#8217;indriyo ca nipako ca</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Appagabbho kulesu ananugiddho</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Content and easy to support,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Having little duties and a light livelihood;</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Calm in faculties and prudent,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Not impudent &amp; greedily attached to families.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Na ca khuddaṁ samācare kiñci</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Yena viññū pare upavadeyyuṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sukhino vā khemino hontu</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sabbe sattā bhavantu sukhit&#8217;attā</p>

  <p class="english-hang">He would not do the slightest thing,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">For which wise others would reproach.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Well and secure may [all beings] be;</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">May all beings be happy at heart.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Ye keci pāṇa-bhūt&#8217;atthi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tasā vā thāvarā vā anavasesā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Dīghā vā ye mahantā vā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Majjhimā rassakā aṇuka-thūlā</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Whatever breathing beings are born,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Whether timid or firm - without remainder</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Whether they are long or they are great,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Whether they are medium, short, minute or fat,</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Diṭṭhā vā ye ca adiṭṭhā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Ye ca dūre vasanti avidūre</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Bhūtā vā sambhavesī vā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sabbe sattā bhavantu sukhit&#8217;attā</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Whether they are seen or unseen,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Whether they live far away or not far away;</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Already born or seeking rebirth</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">May all beings be happy at heart.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Na paro paraṁ nikubbetha</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">N&#8217;ātimaññetha katthaci naṁ kiñci</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Byārosanā paṭīgha-saññā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">N&#8217;āññam&#8217;aññassa dukkham&#8217;iccheyya</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Another (i.e. one) would not deceive another,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Nor look down upon anyone anywhere;</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Nor through anger or hateful perception,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Would wish for one another&#8217;s suffering.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Mātā yathā niyaṁ puttaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Āyusā eka-puttam&#8217;anurakkhe</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Evam&#8217;pi sabba-bhūtesu</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Mānasam&#8217;bhāvaye aparimāṇaṁ</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Just as a mother [her] own child,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">[Her] only child, would protect with [her] life;</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Thus also, towards all beings,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">He would develop the mind without measure.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Mettañ&#8217;ca sabba-lokasmiṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Mānasam&#8217;bhāvaye aparimāṇaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Uddhaṁ adho ca tiriyañ&#8217;ca</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Asambādhaṁ averaṁ asapattaṁ</p>

  <p class="english-hang">And [with] mettā to the whole world,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">He would develop the mind without measure;</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Above, and below and across,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Unrestricted, without enmity or foe.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Tiṭṭhañ&#8217;caraṁ nisinno vā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sayāno vā yāvat&#8217;assa vigata-middho</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etaṁ satiṁ adhiṭṭheyya</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Brahmam&#8217;etaṁ vihāraṁ idham&#8217;āhu</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Whether standing, walking, sitting, or reclining,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Whenever he is free from drowsiness,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">He would resolve on that mindfulness</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together"><q>That is a lofty dwelling,</q> here they say.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Diṭṭhiñ&#8217;ca anupagamma</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sīlavā dassanena sampanno</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Kāmesu vineyya gedhaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Na hi jātu gabbha-seyyaṁ punar-etī&#8217;ti</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Not having arrived at a [wrong] view,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Being virtuous and possessed of vision,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Having removed greed for sense pleasures,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">He never again returns to lie in a womb.</p>

  <div class="suttaref">
    <p>[Snp 1.8]</p>
  </div>

  <h2 class="h2-paritta" id="sigil_toc_id_14"><a style="font-style:normal;" href="schedule.xhtml">Khandha-parittaṁ</a><a id="khandha-parittam"></a></h2>

  <p class="pali-hang">〈 Virūpakkhehi me mettaṁ&#160;〉</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Mettaṁ erāpathehi me</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Chabyāputtehi me mettaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Mettaṁ kaṇhāgotamakehi ca</p>

  <p class="english-hang">With the Virūpakkhas is my loving-kindness.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">My loving-kindness is with the Erāpathas.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">With the Chabyāputtas is my loving-kindness.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">And loving-kindness is with the Kaṇhāgotamakas.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Apādakehi me mettaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Mettaṁ dipādakehi me</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Catuppadehi me mettaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Mettaṁ bahuppadehi me</p>

  <p class="english-hang">With the footless is my loving-kindness.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">My loving-kindness is with the two-footed.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">With the four-footed is my loving-kindness.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">My loving-kindness is with the many-footed.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Mā maṁ apādako hiṁsi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Mā maṁ hiṁsi dipādako</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Mā maṁ catuppado hiṁsi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Mā maṁ hiṁsi bahuppado</p>

  <p class="english-hang">May the footless not harm me.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">May the two-footed harm me not.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">May the four-footed not harm me.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">May the many-footed harm me not.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Sabbe sattā sabbe pāṇā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sabbe bhūtā ca kevalā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sabbe bhadrāni passantu</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Mā kiñci pāpam&#8217;āgamā.</p>

  <p class="english-hang">All sentient beings, all who breathe,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">All the born — in totality</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">May they all meet with good fortune;</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">May they not come to any evil.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">〈 Appamāṇo buddho&#160;〉</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Appamāṇo dhammo</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Appamāṇo saṅgho</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Pamāṇavantāni siriṁsapāni</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Ahi-vicchikā satapadī</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Uṇṇānābhī sarabhū mūsikā</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Measureless is the Buddha,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Measureless is the Dhamma,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Measureless is the Saṅgha.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Measureable are crawling creatures:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Snakes and scorpions and centipedes,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Spiders and lizards and mice and rats.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Katā me rakkhā katā me parittā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Paṭikkamantu bhūtāni</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">So&#8217;haṁ namo bhagavato</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Namo sattannaṁ sammā-sambuddhānaṁ.</p>

  <p class="english-hang">A safeguard has been made by me,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">A protection has been made by me.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Let the already born retreat.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">I pay homage to the Blessed One;</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Homage to the seven Perfectly Self-awakened Ones.</p>

  <div class="suttaref">
    <p>[AN 4.67]</p>
  </div>

  <h2 class="h2-paritta" id="sigil_toc_id_15"><a style="font-style:normal;" href="schedule.xhtml">Buddha-dhamma-saṅgha-guṇā</a><a id="buddha-dhamma-sangha-guna"></a></h2>

  <p class="pali-hang">〈 Iti&#8217;pi so bhagavā&#160;〉</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Arahaṁ sammā-sambuddho</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Vijjā-caraṇa-sampanno</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sugato loka-vidū</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Anuttaro purisa-damma-sārathi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Satthā deva-manussānaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Buddho bhagavā&#8217;ti</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Thus also is the Blessed One</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">An arahant, fully self-awakened,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Accomplished in knowledge and conduct,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Fortunate, knower of the world,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Unsurpassed leader of persons to be tamed,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Teacher of deities and humans,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Awakened and blessed.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Svākkhāto bhagavatā dhammo</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sandiṭṭhiko akāliko ehi-passiko</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Opanayiko paccattaṁ veditabbo viññūhī&#8217;ti</p>

  <p class="english-hang">The Dhamma is well-expounded by the Blessed One,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Directly visible, immediate, inviting one to come and see,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Applicable, to be personally experienced by the wise.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Supaṭipanno bhagavato sāvaka-saṅgho</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Uju-paṭipanno bhagavato sāvaka-saṅgho</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Ñāya-paṭipanno bhagavato sāvaka-saṅgho</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sāmīci-paṭipanno bhagavato sāvaka-saṅgho</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Yad&#8217;idaṁ cattāri purisa-yugāni aṭṭha purisa-puggalā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Esa bhagavato sāvaka-saṅgho</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Āhuneyyo pāhuneyyo dakkhiṇeyyo añjali-karaṇīyo</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Anuttaraṁ puñña-kkhettaṁ lokassā&#8217;ti</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Practicing the good way is the Community of the Blessed One&#8217;s disciples;</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Practicing the straight way is the Community of the Blessed One&#8217;s disciples;</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Practicing the true way is the Community of the Blessed One&#8217;s disciples;</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Practicing the proper way is the Community of the Blessed One&#8217;s disciples;</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">That is, the four pairs of persons, the eight kinds of individuals.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">This is the Community of the Blessed One&#8217;s disciples;</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">The unsurpassed field of merit for the world.</p>

  <div class="suttaref">
    <p>[SN 11.3]</p>
  </div>

  <h2 class="h2-paritta" id="sigil_toc_id_16"><a style="font-style:normal;" href="schedule.xhtml">Yaṅ'kiñci ratanaṁ loke</a><a id="yan-kinci-ratanam-loke"></a></h2>

  <p class="pali-hang">〈 Yaṅ'kiñci ratanaṁ loke&#160;〉</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Vijjati vividhaṁ puthu</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Ratanaṁ buddha-samaṁ n&#8217;atthi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tasmā sotthī bhavantu te</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Whatever kind of jewel in the world</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">There is found by a human being,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">A jewel comparable to the Buddha does not exist;</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Therefore may you be blessed.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Yaṅ'kiñci ratanaṁ loke</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Vijjati vividhaṁ puthu</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Ratanaṁ dhamma-samaṁ n&#8217;atthi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tasmā sotthī bhavantu te</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Whatever kind of jewel in the world</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">There is found by a human being,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">A jewel comparable to the Dhamma does not exist;</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Therefore may you be blessed.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Yaṅ'kiñci ratanaṁ loke</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Vijjati vividhaṁ puthu</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Ratanaṁ saṅgha-samaṁ n&#8217;atthi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tasmā sotthī bhavantu te</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Whatever kind of jewel in the world</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">There is found by a human being,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">A jewel comparable to the Saṅgha does not exist;</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Therefore may you be blessed.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Sakkatvā buddha-ratanaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Osadhaṁ<a id="en147" href="endnotes.xhtml#en147appendix"><sup>147</sup></a> uttamaṁ varaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Hitaṁ deva-manussānaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Buddha-tejena sotthinā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Nassant&#8217;upaddavā sabbe</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Dukkhā vūpasamentu te</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Having revered the jewel of the Buddha,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">The highest, most excellent medicine,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">The welfare of human &amp; heavenly beings:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Through the Buddha&#8217;s might &amp; safety</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">May all obstacles vanish,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">May your sufferings grow totally calm.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Sakkatvā dhamma-ratanaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Osadhaṁ uttamaṁ varaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Pariḷāh&#8217;ūpasamanaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Dhamma-tejena sotthinā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Nassant&#8217;upaddavā sabbe</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Bhayā vūpasamentu te</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Having revered the jewel of the Dhamma,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">The highest, most excellent medicine,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">The stiller of feverish passion:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Through the Dhamma&#8217;s might &amp; safety</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">May all obstacles vanish,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">May your fears grow totally calm.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Sakkatvā saṅgha-ratanaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Osadhaṁ uttamaṁ varaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Āhuneyyaṁ pāhuneyyaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Saṅgha-tejena sotthinā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Nassant&#8217;upaddavā sabbe</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Rogā vūpasamentu te</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Having revered the jewel of the Saṅgha,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">The highest, most excellent medicine,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Through the Saṅgha&#8217;s might &amp; safety</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">May all obstacles vanish,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">May your diseases grow totally calm.</p>

  <div class="suttaref">
    <p>[MJG]</p>
  </div>

  <h2 class="h2-paritta" id="sigil_toc_id_17"><a style="font-style:normal;" href="schedule.xhtml">Bojjh&#8217;aṅga-parittaṁ</a><a id="bojjhana-parittam"></a></h2>

  <p class="pali-hang">〈 Bojjh&#8217;aṅgo sati-saṅkhāto&#160;〉</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Dhammānaṁ vicayo tathā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Viriyam&#8217;pīti-passaddhi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Bojjh&#8217;aṅgā ca tathā&#8217;pare</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Samādh&#8217;upekkha-bojjh&#8217;aṅgā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Satt&#8217;ete sabba-dassinā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Muninā samma&#8217;d&#8217;akkhātā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Bhāvitā bahulī-katā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Saṁvattanti abhiññāya</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Nibbānāya ca bodhiyā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etena sacca-vajjena</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sotthi te hotu sabbadā</p>

  <p class="english-hang">The Factors for Awakening include mindfulness,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Investigation of qualities,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Persistence, rapture, &amp; serenity,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Plus concentration &amp; equanimity factors for Awakening.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">These seven, which the All-seeing Sage has perfectly taught,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">When developed &amp; matured bring about heightened knowledge, Liberation, &amp; awakening.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By the saying of this truth,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">May you always be well.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Ekasmiṁ samaye nātho</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Moggallānañ&#8217;ca kassapaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Gilāne dukkhite disvā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Bojjh&#8217;aṅge satta desayi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Te ca taṁ abhinanditvā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Rogā mucciṁsu taṅ&#8217;khaṇe</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etena sacca-vajjena</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sotthi te hotu sabbadā</p>

  <p class="english-hang">At one time, our Protector seeing that Moggallana &amp; Kassapa</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Were sick &amp; in pain, taught them the seven factors for Awakening.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">They, delighting in that, were instantly freed from their illness.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By the saying of this truth, may you always be well.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Ekadā dhamma-rājā&#8217;pi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Gelaññen&#8217;ābhipīḷito</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Cundattherena taññ&#8217;eva</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Bhaṇāpetvāna sādaraṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sammoditvā ca ābādhā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tamhā vuṭṭhāsi ṭhānaso</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etena sacca-vajjena</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sotthi te hotu sabbadā</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Once, when the Dhamma King was afflicted with fever,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">He had the Elder Cunda recite that very teaching with devotion.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">And as he approved, he rose up from that disease.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By the saying of this truth, may you always be well.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Pahīnā te ca ābādhā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tiṇṇannam&#8217;pi mah&#8217;esinaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Magg&#8217;āhata-kilesā va</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Patt&#8217;ānuppatti-dhammataṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etena sacca-vajjena</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sotthi te hotu sabbadā</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Those diseases were abandoned by the three great seers,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Just as defilements are demolished by the Path</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">In accordance with step-by-step attainment.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By the saying of this truth, may you always be well.</p>

  <div class="suttaref">
    <p>[Thai]</p>
  </div>

  <h2 class="h2-paritta" id="sigil_toc_id_18"><a style="font-style:normal;" href="schedule.xhtml">Abhaya-parittaṁ</a><a id="abhaya-parittam"></a></h2>

  <p class="pali-hang">〈 Yan&#8217;dunnimittaṁ&#160;〉 avamaṅgalañ&#8217;ca</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Yo c&#8217;āmanāpo sakuṇassa saddo</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Pāpaggaho dussupinaṁ akantaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Buddh&#8217;ānubhāvena vināsam'entu</p>

  <p class="english-hang">May bad omens, inauspiciousness,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Undesirable sounds of birds,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Unlucky planets and unpleasant bad dreams</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Go to ruin by the power of the Buddha.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Yan&#8217;dunnimittaṁ avamaṅgalañ&#8217;ca</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Yo c&#8217;āmanāpo sakuṇassa saddo</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Pāpaggaho dussupinaṁ akantaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Dhamm&#8217;ānubhāvena vināsam'entu</p>

  <p class="english-hang">May bad omens, inauspiciousness,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Undesirable sounds of birds,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Unlucky planets and unpleasant bad dreams</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Go to ruin by the power of the Dhamma.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Yan&#8217;dunnimittaṁ avamaṅgalañ&#8217;ca</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Yo c&#8217;āmanāpo sakuṇassa saddo</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Pāpaggaho dussupinaṁ akantaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Saṅgh&#8217;ānubhāvena vināsam'entu</p>

  <p class="english-hang">May bad omens, inauspiciousness,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Undesirable sounds of birds,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Unlucky planets and unpleasant bad dreams</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Go to ruin by the power of the Saṅgha.</p>

  <div class="suttaref">
    <p>[Trad]</p>
  </div>

  <h2 class="h2-paritta" id="sigil_toc_id_19"><a style="font-style:normal;" href="schedule.xhtml">Devatā-uyyojana-gāthā</a><a id="devata-uyyojana-gatha"></a></h2>

  <p class="pali-hang">〈 Dukkhappattā&#160;〉 ca niddukkhā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Bhayappattā ca nibbhayā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sokappattā ca nissokā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Hontu sabbe&#8217;pi pāṇino</p>

  <p class="english-hang">[May] sufferers be without suffering,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">The fear-struck be without fear,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">The grief-stricken be without grief</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">[Thus] may all beings be.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Ettāvatā ca amhehi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sambhataṁ puñña-sampadaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sabbe devā anumodantu<a id="en148" href="endnotes.xhtml#en148appendix"><sup>148</sup></a></p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sabba-sampatti-siddhiyā</p>

  <p class="english-hang">To the extent that all of us</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Have accumulated a wealth of merits;</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">In this may all devas rejoice,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">For the attainment of all fortunes.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Dānaṁ dadantu saddhāya</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sīlaṁ rakkhantu sabbadā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Bhāvan&#8217;ābhiratā hontu</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Gacchantu devatā-gatā</p>

  <p class="english-hang">May they give gifts with faith.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">May they guard moral precepts always.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">May they delight in mind-development.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">May the deities who have come go [back].</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">〈 Sabbe buddhā&#160;〉 balappattā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Paccekānañ&#8217;ca yaṁ balaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Arahantānañ&#8217;ca tejena</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Rakkhaṁ bandhāmi sabbaso</p>

  <p class="english-hang">All Buddhas possess [supernormal] strength.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">And [there is] the power of Paccekabuddhas.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By the power of the arahants too,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">I create protection for all times.</p>

  <div class="suttaref">
    <p>[MJG]</p>
  </div>

  <h2 class="h2-paritta" id="sigil_toc_id_20"><a style="font-style:normal;" href="schedule.xhtml">Jaya-maṅgala-aṭṭha-gāthā</a><a id="jaya-mangala-attha-gatha"></a></h2>

  <p class="pali-hang">〈 Bāhuṁ&#160;〉 sahassam&#8217;abhinimmita sāvudhan&#8217;taṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Grīmekhalaṁ udita-ghora-sasena-māraṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Dān&#8217;ādi-dhamma-vidhinā jitavā<a id="en149" href="endnotes.xhtml#en149appendix"><sup>149</sup></a> mun&#8217;indo</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tan&#8217;tejasā bhavatu te jaya-maṅgalāni</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Creating a form with 1,000 arms, each equipped with a weapon,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Mara, on the elephant Girimekhala, uttered a frightening roar together with his troops.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">The Lord of Sages defeated him by means of such qualities as generosity:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By the power of this, may you have victory blessings.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Mār&#8217;ātirekam&#8217;abhiyujjhita-sabba-rattiṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Ghoram&#8217;pan&#8217;āḷavakam&#8217;akkhama-thaddha-yakkhaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Khantī-sudanta-vidhinā jitavā mun&#8217;indo</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tan&#8217;tejasā bhavatu te jaya-maṅgalāni</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Even more frightful than Māra making war all night</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Was Āḷavaka, the arrogant unstable ogre.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">The Lord of Sages defeated him by means of well-trained endurance:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By the power of this, may you have victory blessings.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Nāḷāgiriṁ gaja-varaṁ atimatta-bhūtaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Dāv&#8217;aggi-cakkam&#8217;asanīva sudāruṇan&#8217;taṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Mett&#8217;ambu-seka-vidhinā jitavā mun&#8217;indo</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tan&#8217;tejasā bhavatu te jaya-maṅgalāni</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Nāḷāgiri, the excellent elephant, when maddened,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Was very horrific, like a forest fire, a flaming discus, a lightning bolt.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">The Lord of Sages defeated him by sprinkling the water of good will:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By the power of this, may you have victory blessings.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Ukkhitta-khaggam&#8217;atihattha-sudāruṇan&#8217;taṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Dhāvan&#8217;ti-yojana-path&#8217;aṅguli-mālavantaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Iddhī&#8217;bhisaṅkhata-mano jitavā mun&#8217;indo</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tan&#8217;tejasā bhavatu te jaya-maṅgalāni</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Very horrific, with a sword upraised in his expert hand,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Garlanded-with-Fingers ran three leagues along the path.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">The Lord of Sages defeated him with mind-fashioned marvels:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By the power of this, may you have victory blessings.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Katvāna kaṭṭham&#8217;udaraṁ iva gabbhinīyā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Ciñcāya duṭṭha-vacanaṁ jana-kāya majjhe</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Santena soma-vidhinā jitavā mun&#8217;indo</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tan&#8217;tejasā bhavatu te jaya-maṅgalāni</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Having made a wooden belly to appear pregnant,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Ciñca made a lewd accusation in the midst of the gathering.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">The Lord of Sages defeated her with peaceful, gracious means:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By the power of this, may you have victory blessings.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Saccaṁ vihāya mati-saccaka-vāda-ketuṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Vād&#8217;ābhiropita-manaṁ ati-andha-bhūtaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Paññā-padīpa-jalito jitavā mun&#8217;indo</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tan&#8217;tejasā bhavatu te jaya-maṅgalāni</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Saccaka, whose provocative views had abandoned the truth,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Delighting in argument, had become thoroughly blind.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">The Lord of Sages defeated him with the light of discernment:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By the power of this, may you have victory blessings.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Nandopananda-bhujagaṁ vibudhaṁ mah&#8217;iddhiṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Puttena thera-bhujagena dam&#8217;āpayanto</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Iddh&#8217;ūpadesa-vidhinā jitavā mun&#8217;indo</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tan&#8217;tejasā bhavatu te jaya-maṅgalāni</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Nandopananda was a serpent with great power but wrong views.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">The Lord of Sages defeated him by means of a display of marvels,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Sending his son, the serpent-elder, to tame him:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By the power of this, may you have victory blessings.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Duggāha-diṭṭhi-bhujagena sudaṭṭha-hatthaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Brahmaṁ visuddhi-jutim&#8217;iddhi-bak&#8217;ābhidhānaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Ñāṇāgadena vidhinā jitavā mun&#8217;indo</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tan&#8217;tejasā bhavatu te jaya-maṅgalāni</p>

  <p class="english-hang">His hands bound tight by the serpent of wrongly held views,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Baka, the Brahma, thought himself pure in his radiance &amp; power.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">The Lord of Sages defeated him by means of his words of knowledge:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By the power of this, may you have victory blessings.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Etā&#8217;pi buddha-jaya-maṅgala-aṭṭha-gāthā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Yo vācano dina-dine sarate&#8217;m&#8217;atandī</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Hitvān&#8217;aneka-vividhāni c&#8217;upaddavāni</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Mokkhaṁ sukhaṁ adhigameyya naro sapañño</p>

  <p class="english-hang">These eight verses of the Buddha&#8217;s victory blessings:</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Whatever person of discernment recites or recalls them day after day without lapsing,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Destroying all kinds of obstacles,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Will attain emancipation &amp; happiness.</p>

  <div class="suttaref">
    <p>[Trad]</p>
  </div>

  <h2 class="h2-paritta" id="sigil_toc_id_21"><a style="font-style:normal;" href="schedule.xhtml">Jaya-parittaṁ</a><a id="jaya-parittam"></a></h2>

  <p class="pali-hang">〈 Mahā-kāruṇiko&#160;〉 nātho</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Hitāya sabba-pāṇinaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Pūretvā pāramī sabbā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Patto sambodhim&#8217;uttamaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Etena sacca-vajjena</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Hotu te jaya-maṅgalaṁ</p>

  <p class="english-hang">The Great Compassionate Protector,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">For the benefit of all beings,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Fulfilled all the Perfections</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">And reached the highest Awakening.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By this utterance of truth,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">May there be well-being for you always.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Jayanto bodhiyā mūle</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sakyānaṁ nandi-vaḍḍhano</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Evaṁ tvaṁ vijayo hohi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Jayassu jaya-maṅgale</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Victorious at the foot of the bodhi tree</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Was the joy-enhancer of the Sakyas.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Even so, may there be victory.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">May you attain auspicious victory.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Aparājita-pallaṅke</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sīse paṭhavi-pokkhare</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Abhiseke sabba-buddhānaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Aggappatto pamodati</p>

  <p class="english-hang">At the invincible seat,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">The best on Earth,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">The consecration place of all Buddhas,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Having reached the highest, he rejoices.</p>

  <div class="suttaref">
    <p>[MJG]</p>
  </div>

  <p class="pali-hang">Sunakkhattaṁ sumaṅgalaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Supabhātaṁ suhuṭṭhitaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sukhaṇo sumuhutto ca</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Suyiṭṭhaṁ brahmacārisu</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Good constellations, good blessings,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Good daybreak, good waking,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Good moment and good time</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">When offerings are made to holy practitioners.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Padakkhiṇaṁ kāya-kammaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Vācā-kammaṁ padakkhiṇaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Padakkhiṇaṁ mano-kammaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Paṇīdhi te padakkhiṇe<a id="en150" href="endnotes.xhtml#en150appendix"><sup>150</sup></a></p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Padakkhiṇāni katvāna</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Labhant&#8217;atthe padakkhiṇe</p>

<!-- No punctuation for this english -->

  <p class="english-hang">Felicitous is bodily kamma</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Verbal kamma is felicitous</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Felicitous is mental kamma</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">When aspiring for felicity</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">Having done the felicitous</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">They get felicitous rewards</p>

  <div class="suttaref">
    <p>[AN 3.155]</p>
  </div>

  <h2 class="h2-paritta" id="sigil_toc_id_22"><a style="font-style:normal;" href="schedule.xhtml">Bhavatu-sabba-maṅgalaṁ</a><a id="bhavatu-sabba-maṅgalaṁ-protective"></a></h2>

  <p class="pali-hang">〈 Bhavatu sabba-maṅgalaṁ&#160;〉</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Rakkhantu sabba-devatā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sabba-buddh&#8217;ānubhāvena</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sadā sotthī bhavantu te</p>

  <p class="english-hang">May there be all blessings.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">May all deities give protection.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By the power of all Buddhas,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">May there ever be well-being for you.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Bhavatu sabba-maṅgalaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Rakkhantu sabba-devatā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sabba-dhamm&#8217;ānubhāvena</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sadā sotthī bhavantu te</p>

  <p class="english-hang">May there be all blessings.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">May all deities give protection.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By the power of all Dhammas,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">May there ever be well-being for you.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Bhavatu sabba-maṅgalaṁ</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Rakkhantu sabba-devatā</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sabba-saṅgh&#8217;ānubhāvena</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Sadā sotthī&#160;<span class="breathmark">’</span> bhavantu te</p>

  <p class="english-hang">May there be all blessings.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">May all deities give protection.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">By the power of all Saṅghas,</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">May there ever be well-being for you.</p>

  <div class="suttaref">
    <p>[Trad]</p>
  </div>

  <div class="bottomnav">
    <a href="schedule.xhtml" style="font-style:normal" class="active">Schedule</a>&#160;&#160;<span class="wheel-of-dhamma">☸</span>&#160;&#160;<a href="sharing-merits-departed.xhtml" style="font-style:normal">Next</a>
  </div>
</body>
</html>