<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Endnotes</title>
  <link href="../Styles/bottomnav.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
  <link href="../Styles/main.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
  <link href="../Styles/suttaref.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
</head>

<body>
  <h1><a style="font-style:normal;" href="schedule.xhtml">Endnotes</a></h1>

  <p><a href="acknowledgments.xhtml#en1" id="en1appendix"><sup>1</sup></a> Due to the balanced and inspiring selection of chants, as well as for the sake of compatibility, WPN <i>Buddhist Chanting</i> (2014) has served as the basis for this book. Over time, suggestions for the inclusion of additional chants, as well as occasional improvements of existing translations were incorporated. Such changes were meticulously marked down in the endnotes, so that someone familiar with the present book can straight away find the relevant differences, which can be useful when visiting a branch monastery of the Ajahn Chah lineage, in order to know in which places to revert to the original version.</p>

  <p><a href="dedication-of-offerings.xhtml#en2" id="en2appendix"><sup>2</sup></a> WPN: <q>The Lord</q>. The underlying Pāli term is <q><em>Arahant</em></q>. <q>Lord</q>, however, has connotations that do not fit well to the way the Buddha is portrayed in the discourses. In dictionaries <q>lord</q> is commonly defined as: <q>an appellation for a person or deity who has authority, control, or power over others, acting like a master, a chief, or a ruler</q>. The <q>Worthy One</q> seems a better choice of terms, since it is also how <q><em>Arahant</em></q> was used in pre-Buddhist era. PTS explains:<q>[Vedic <em>arhant</em>, ppr. of <em>arhati</em> (see <em>arahati</em>), meaning deserving, worthy]</q>. Throughout this chanting book, all occurrences of <q><em>Arahant</em></q> have therefore been consistently translated as <q>Worthy One</q>, thus replacing previous translations, such as <q>The Lord</q>, <q>Noble One</q> etc.</p>

  <p><a href="homage-buddha.xhtml#en3" id="en3appendix"><sup>3</sup></a> WPN: <q>He trains perfectly those who wish to be trained</q>. The aspect of wishing to be trained is not found in the Pāli.</p>

  <p><a href="homage-buddha.xhtml#en4" id="en4appendix"><sup>4</sup></a> WPN: <q>He has explained the spiritual life of complete purity</q>. While <q>spiritual life</q> is not a bad translation, for the sake of consistency with the rest of the chanting book, this occurrence was changed to <q>holy life</q>.</p>

  <p><a href="homage-sangha.xhtml#en5" id="en5appendix"><sup>5</sup></a> To practice <q>directly</q>(Pāli: <em>uju</em>) means, to practice the most direct way to <em>Nibbāna</em>; the straight way; no detours.</p>

  <p><a href="homage-sangha.xhtml#en6" id="en6appendix"><sup>6</sup></a> WPN: <q>Who have practiced insightfully</q></p>

  <p><a href="homage-sangha.xhtml#en7" id="en7appendix"><sup>7</sup></a> WPN: <q>Those who practice with integrity</q></p>

  <p><a href="homage-sangha.xhtml#en8" id="en8appendix"><sup>8</sup></a> WPN: <q>They give occasion for incomparable goodness to arise in the world</q></p>

  <p><a href="salutation.xhtml#en9" id="en9appendix"><sup>9</sup></a> WPN: <q>The teaching of the Lord like a lamp</q></p>

  <p><a href="salutation.xhtml#en10" id="en10appendix"><sup>10</sup></a> WPN: <q>Illuminating the path and its fruit, the Deathless</q></p>

  <p><a href="salutation.xhtml#en11" id="en11appendix"><sup>11</sup></a> WPN: <q>That which is beyond the conditioned world</q></p>

  <p><a href="salutation.xhtml#en12" id="en12appendix"><sup>12</sup></a> WPN: <q>To that which is worthy</q>. This passage refers to the triple (<em>taya</em>) gems and not just to the Saṅgha.</p>

  <p><a href="salutation.xhtml#en13" id="en13appendix"><sup>13</sup></a> <q>One who knows things as they are</q> is an unusual translation for <em>Tathāgata</em>. Also <q>arisen in</q> is better than <q>has come into</q>, otherwise one might think that he has come from somewhere, already being a <em>Tathāgata</em>.</p>

  <p><a href="salutation.xhtml#en14" id="en14appendix"><sup>14</sup></a> No mention of <q>delusion</q> in the Pāli. It could also refer to <em>samsāra</em> or <em>dukkha</em>.</p>

  <p><a href="salutation.xhtml#en15" id="en15appendix"><sup>15</sup></a> WPN: <q>grief</q></p>

  <p><a href="salutation.xhtml#en16" id="en16appendix"><sup>16</sup></a> WPN: <q>In brief the five focuses of identity are <em>dukkha</em></q></p>

  <p><a href="salutation.xhtml#en17" id="en17appendix"><sup>17</sup></a> WPN: <q>Attachment to mental formations</q>. While the Pāli term <q>saṅkhārā</q> only means <q>formations</q>, Bhikkhu Bodhi’s rendering as <q>volitional formations</q> captures well the intentional/volitional forces behind the formative nature of the mind.</p>

  <p><a href="salutation.xhtml#en18" id="en18appendix"><sup>18</sup></a> WPN: <q>Attachment to sense-consciousness</q></p>

  <p><a href="salutation.xhtml#en19" id="en19appendix"><sup>19</sup></a> WPN: <q>Mental formations are impermanent</q></p>

  <p><a href="salutation.xhtml#en20" id="en20appendix"><sup>20</sup></a> WPN: <q>Sense-consciousness is impermanent</q></p>

  <p><a href="salutation.xhtml#en21" id="en21appendix"><sup>21</sup></a> WPN: <q>Mental formations are not-self</q></p>

  <p><a href="salutation.xhtml#en22" id="en22appendix"><sup>22</sup></a> WPN: <q>Sense-consciousness is not-self</q></p>

  <p><a href="salutation.xhtml#en23" id="en23appendix"><sup>23</sup></a> WPN: <q>All conditions are transient</q></p>

  <p><a href="salutation.xhtml#en24" id="en24appendix"><sup>24</sup></a> WPN: <q>There is no self in the created or the uncreated</q>. While this is not a very accurate translation, it is indeed the case that the term <q><em>sabbe dhammā</em></q> includes the uncreated, <em>Nibbāna</em> (see AN 5.32).</p>

  <p><a href="salutation.xhtml#en25" id="en25appendix"><sup>25</sup></a> WPN: <q>All of us are bound by birth ageing and death</q></p>

  <p><a href="salutation.xhtml#en26" id="en26appendix"><sup>26</sup></a> WPN: <q>grief</q></p>

  <p><a href="salutation.xhtml#en27" id="en27appendix"><sup>27</sup></a> In Pāli, these terms are in plural form, however, for the sake of recitation they are kept singular.</p>

  <p><a href="salutation.xhtml#en28" id="en28appendix"><sup>28</sup></a> WPN: <q>All of us are bound by birth ageing and death</q></p>

  <p><a href="salutation.xhtml#en29" id="en29appendix"><sup>29</sup></a> WPN: <q>Being fully equipped with the bhikkhus’system of training</q></p>

  <p><a href="respect-for-the-dhamma.xhtml#en30" id="en30appendix"><sup>30</sup></a> WPN: <q>what not</q>: ‘What not’ is usually followed by what is similar. Furthermore, the meaning of <em>adhamma</em> in this context describes not only the lack of <em>Dhamma</em>, but the practice of wrong <em>Dhamma</em>.</p>

  <p><a href="respect-for-the-dhamma.xhtml#en31" id="en31appendix"><sup>31</sup></a> WPN: <q>lack of Dhamma</q> This translation is problematic, because a mere <q>lack of Dhamma</q> does not lead to rebirth in hell; otherwise all non-Buddhists would be destined to hell. In reality, it is the view and practice of <q>wrong Dhamma</q> that leads to hell, which is also substantiated by the Commentary, which defines <q>adhamma</q> as the opposite (<em>paṭipakkha</em>) of true Dhamma.</p>

  <p><a href="respect-for-the-dhamma.xhtml#en32" id="en32appendix"><sup>32</sup></a> This line is missing in WPN.</p>

  <p><a href="true-false-refuges.xhtml#en33" id="en33appendix"><sup>33</sup></a> WPN: <q>from suffering</q></p>

  <p><a href="true-false-refuges.xhtml#en34" id="en34appendix"><sup>34</sup></a> WPN: <q>Whoever goes to refuge</q></p>

  <p><a href="true-false-refuges.xhtml#en35" id="en35appendix"><sup>35</sup></a> WPN: <q>In the Triple Gem</q>. It has been shown in Āyasma Aggacitta’s <q>Do We Go to the Triple Gem for Refuge?</q> that one does not go for refuge in the triple gem (the Buddha, Dhamma, and Ariya-saṅgha), but the discourses repeatedly depict the Buddha, Dhamma, and Bhikkhu-saṅgha as the community to take refuge in (DN 2, MN 91, SN 12.46, AN 2.16 etc.).</p>



  <p><a href="patimokkha-exhortation.xhtml#en36" id="en36appendix"><sup>36</sup></a> There are two variations as to the sequence of these three verses. The sequence used here follows the sequence of Dhp 183 (<em>Sabba pāpassa</em>...), Dhp 184 (<em>Khantī paramaṁ</em>...), Dhp 185 (<em>Anūpavādo</em>...). In contrast, the sequence Dhp 184, 183, 185 is commonly known as the <q><em>Ovādapātimokkha</em></q>, and occurs at DN 14.</p>

  <p><a href="three-characteristics.xhtml#en37" id="en37appendix"><sup>37</sup></a> WPN: <q>Impermanent are all conditioned things</q></p>

  <p><a href="three-characteristics.xhtml#en38" id="en38appendix"><sup>38</sup></a> <q><em>Dukkha</em></q> here refers to the five aggregates themselves, as explained in SN 56.11: <q>The five aggregates of clinging are <em>dukkha</em></q>. Along similar lines, the five aggregates are called <q>burdens</q> in SN 22.22.</p>

  <p><a href="three-characteristics.xhtml#en39" id="en39appendix"><sup>39</sup></a> WPN: <q>Dukkha are all conditioned things</q></p>

  <p><a href="three-characteristics.xhtml#en40" id="en40appendix"><sup>40</sup></a> WPN: <q>From the floods dry land they reach</q></p>

  <p><a href="three-characteristics.xhtml#en41" id="en41appendix"><sup>41</sup></a> WPN: <q>Living withdrawn so hard to do</q></p>

  <p><a href="burdens.xhtml#en42" id="en42appendix"><sup>42</sup></a> WPN: <q>The beast of burden though is man</q>. The Pāli word <q><em>puggalo</em></q> is in masculine, which is the expected grammatical form even if a term refers to males and females alike, as is probably the case here. Furthermore, the phrase <q>beast of burden</q> is an English idiomatic expression, signifying <q>an animal used for heavy work such as carrying or pulling things</q> (Oxford Dictionary).</p>

  <p><a href="protection.xhtml#en43" id="en43appendix"><sup>43</sup></a> <q>Unity</q> here refers to unity of mind due to concentration (<em>samādhi</em>, <em>cittass-ekaggatā</em>). <em>Nekatta</em> = <em>na</em> + <em>ekatta</em> [abstr. fr. <em>eka</em>].</p>

  <p><a href="protection.xhtml#en44" id="en44appendix"><sup>44</sup></a> WPN: <q>The dust of passions all the more</q>. The Pāli only speaks of stirring up dust, but the Commentary explains that it refers to the dust of <em>kilesā</em>. As a translation for <em>kilesā</em>, the term <q>defilements</q> has a broader scope than just <q>passions</q>, wherefore the former has been given preference.</p>

  <p><a href="misc-verses.xhtml#en45" id="en45appendix"><sup>45</sup></a> The meaning of this statement is somewhat cryptic. The Commentary explains as follows: <em>pamādo rajo</em> = heedlessness is dust; <em>pamādo pamād’ānupatito rajo</em> = the dust that follows heedlessness is (also) heedlessness; the Commentary further explains that this is about procrastination, e.g. <q>I am still young, so I can afford to be heedless; maybe later I’ll be heedful</q>.</p>

  <p><a href="single-excellent-night.xhtml#en46" id="en46appendix"><sup>46</sup></a> WPN: <q><em>viddhā</em></q>. The Siam edition has <em>viddhā</em> (pierced) whereas the Burmese and Sri Lankan edition of the same text have <em>vidvā</em> (the wise), which seems to be the variant that better conveys the intended meaning of the text.</p>

  <p><a href="single-excellent-night.xhtml#en47" id="en47appendix"><sup>47</sup></a> WPN: <q>Such insight is one’s strength</q></p>

  <p><a href="single-excellent-night.xhtml#en48" id="en48appendix"><sup>48</sup></a> WPN: <q>Thus for a night of non-decline</q></p>

  <p><a href="single-excellent-night.xhtml#en49" id="en49appendix"><sup>49</sup></a> WPN: <q>a shining night of prosperty</q></p>

  <p><a href="highest-blessings.xhtml#en50" id="en50appendix"><sup>50</sup></a> The term <q>blessing</q> is used throughout this chanting book to convey the meaning of <q>support</q>, or <q>a beneficial thing</q>, without implying the underlying Christian connotations this term may have in popular use.</p>

  <p><a href="highest-blessings.xhtml#en51" id="en51appendix"><sup>51</sup></a> WPN: <q>Was staying at Sāvatthī</q></p>

  <p><a href="highest-blessings.xhtml#en52" id="en52appendix"><sup>52</sup></a> WPN: <q>that harm no being</q></p>

  <p><a href="highest-blessings.xhtml#en53" id="en53appendix"><sup>53</sup></a> WPN: <q>And hearing the Dhamma frequently taught</q></p>

  <p><a href="highest-blessings.xhtml#en54" id="en54appendix"><sup>54</sup></a> WPN: <q>And sharing often the words of Dhamma</q></p>

  <p><a href="highest-blessings.xhtml#en55" id="en55appendix"><sup>55</sup></a> WPN: <q>ardent committed</q></p>

  <p><a href="words-on-loving-kindness.xhtml#en56" id="en56appendix"><sup>56</sup></a> WPN: <q>Even</q></p>

  <p><a href="words-on-loving-kindness.xhtml#en57" id="en57appendix"><sup>57</sup></a> What is translated here as <q>cherishing all living beings</q>, could more literally be translated as <q>developing a measureless mind towards all beings</q>.</p>

  <p><a href="words-on-loving-kindness.xhtml#en58" id="en58appendix"><sup>58</sup></a> WPN: <q>to fixed views</q>. This paragraph deals with <em>Anāgāmis</em>, which becomes apparent from the closing statement in which it is said that by this practice one becomes free from sense desires and is not born again into this world (sense sphere). The limitation of loving-kindness practice leading <q>only</q> up to <em>Anāgāmihood</em> also finds confirmation by AN 4.126. Now, since an <em>Anāgāmi</em> has right view, which is the first factor of the noble eightfold path (even <em>Arahants</em> hold right view; AN 10.112), it would therefore not be correct to say that he holds no views at all. Furthermore, even an <em>Anāgāmi</em> may still have some minor grasping to (right) view, as there can still be moments of <em>māna</em> (identification/conceit), which is overcome only by the <em>Arahant</em>. I therefore conclude that this passage here refers specifically to <q>wrong views</q> and does not include <q>right view</q>, since wrong views are the only types of views that an <em>Anāgāmi</em> has entirely left behind.</p>

  <p><a href="wheel-of-dhamma-abridged.xhtml#en59" id="en59appendix"><sup>59</sup></a> WPN: <q>It is this Noble Eightfold Path</q></p>

  <p><a href="wheel-of-dhamma-abridged.xhtml#en60" id="en60appendix"><sup>60</sup></a> For some reason <q><em>byādhi’pi dukkho</em></q> is missing from the WPN version of this chanting book. The reason for this omission is unclear, because even the Thai edition of this discourse contains <q><em>byādhi’pi dukkho</em></q>. However, the definition of the four noble truths in the context of the <em>Satipaṭṭhānasuttas</em> in DN and MN do not contain <q><em>byādhi’pi dukkho</em></q>. It may be that the compilers of this chanting book copy/pasted this passage from the wrong discourse, thinking it is the same, whereas in reality there is this small difference.</p>

  <p><a href="wheel-of-dhamma-abridged.xhtml#en61" id="en61appendix"><sup>61</sup></a> WPN: <q>grief</q></p>

  <p><a href="wheel-of-dhamma-abridged.xhtml#en62" id="en62appendix"><sup>62</sup></a> WPN: <q>In brief the five focuses of identity are <em>dukkha</em></q></p>

  <p><a href="wheel-of-dhamma-abridged.xhtml#en63" id="en63appendix"><sup>63</sup></a> WPN: <q>Light arose</q></p>

  <p><a href="wheel-of-dhamma-abridged.xhtml#en64" id="en64appendix"><sup>64</sup></a> WPN: <q>Now this Noble Truth of <em>dukkha</em></q></p>

  <p><a href="wheel-of-dhamma-abridged.xhtml#en65" id="en65appendix"><sup>65</sup></a> WPN: <q>As long <em>bhikkhus</em> as</q></p>

  <p><a href="wheel-of-dhamma-abridged.xhtml#en66" id="en66appendix"><sup>66</sup></a> The three phases are comprised of the statement of the noble truth itself, followed by what is the task that is to be performed in relation to this noble truth, followed by the statement that the task has been performed. Four truths multiplied by three phases, results in 12 aspects.</p>

  <p><a href="wheel-of-dhamma-abridged.xhtml#en67" id="en67appendix"><sup>67</sup></a> Instead of the nominative <q><em>abhisambuddo</em></q> (Thai and Buddha Jayanti Pāli edition), one would usually expect the accusative or a quotation here, which is indeed what is found in the PTS and Chatta Saṅgāyana editions, giving <q><em>abhisambuddho’ti</em></q>. However, the anoumolous reading <q><em>abhisambuddho</em></q> finds support from <em>Mahāvasutu</em>: <q><em>yāvac cāhaṁ bhikṣavaḥ imāni catvāry āryasatyāni evaṁ triparivartaṁ dvādaśākāraṁ yathā-bhūtaṁ samyakprajñayā nābhyajñāsiṣaṁ na tāvad ahaṁ anuttarāṁ samyaksaṁbodhim abhisaṁbuddho pratijānehaṁ</em></q>, which according to Ven. Ānandajoti probably indicates that <q><em>abhisambuddho</em></q> is an old/original reading.</p>

  <p><a href="wheel-of-dhamma-abridged.xhtml#en68" id="en68appendix"><sup>68</sup></a> WPN: <q>But when <em>bhikkhus</em></q></p>

  <p><a href="gradual-training.xhtml#en69" id="en69appendix"><sup>69</sup></a> Bhikkhu Bodhi: [those people]. Removed brackets for the sake of recitability.</p>

  <p><a href="gradual-training.xhtml#en70" id="en70appendix"><sup>70</sup></a> The Vinaya defines the wrong time for eating as from noon until dawnrise of the following day.</p>

  <p><a href="gradual-training.xhtml#en71" id="en71appendix"><sup>71</sup></a> Contrary to popular belief, mindfulness and full awareness is not meant to be practiced while sleeping, but only before falling asleep and after waking up.</p>

  <p><a href="gradual-training.xhtml#en72" id="en72appendix"><sup>72</sup></a> WPN: <q>covetousness</q></p>

  <p><a href="noble-eightfold-path.xhtml#en73" id="en73appendix"><sup>73</sup></a> Descriptions of right and wrong livelihood can be found at AN 5.83, AN 5.177, AN 6.18, AN 8.54, AN 10.91.</p>

  <p><a href="noble-eightfold-path.xhtml#en74" id="en74appendix"><sup>74</sup></a> WPN: <q>covetousness and grief</q></p>

  <p><a href="noble-eightfold-path.xhtml#en75" id="en75appendix"><sup>75</sup></a> WPN: <q>He abides contemplating mind-objects as mind-objects</q>. Since <q>mind-object</q> is not an ideal translation for <q><em>dhamma</em></q> in this context, it is preferable to leave <q><em>dhamma</em></q> untranslated here.</p>

  <p><a href="noble-eightfold-path.xhtml#en76" id="en76appendix"><sup>76</sup></a> <q>Quite secluded from sense pleasures</q> means being completely and entirely secluded; not just somewhat/moderately secluded. The Pāli term <q><em>eva</em></q>, which has been translated as <q>quite</q> is an emphatic particle, intensifying the adjective it qualifies. According to the Oxford English Dictionary, the English term <q>quite</q> has two connotations: 1. to the utmost – or most – absolute extent or degree; absolutely; completely; 2. To a certain or fairly significant extent or degree; fairly. It is the first connotation in which <q>quite</q> is used in the phrase <q>quite secluded from sense pleasures</q>.</p>

  <p><a href="noble-eightfold-path.xhtml#en77" id="en77appendix"><sup>77</sup></a> The meaning of <em>pasāda</em> as <q>confidence</q> also finds expression in the qualities of a stream-enterer, who is declared to have <em>aveccapasāda</em> (AN 3.75) in the Buddha, Dhamma, and Saṅgha, which Āyasmā (Bhikkhu) Bodhi translates as <q>unwavering confidence</q> and Āyasmā  (Bhikkhu) Sujāto translates as <q>experiential confidence</q>. The qualifier <em>ajjhatta</em> as found in the stock formula of the second Jhāna is rendered as <q>inner/self confidence</q>. Alternative translations for <q><em>ajjhattaṁ sampasādanaṁ</em></q> would be <q>inner serenity</q>, <q>inner clarity</q>, <q>inner joy</q>, and it is up to the reader/reciter to reflect on these additional connotations of the term as seen fit.</p>

  <p><a href="noble-eightfold-path.xhtml#en78" id="en78appendix"><sup>78</sup></a> WPN: <q>Still feeling pleasure with the body</q>. The Pāli doesn’t say <q>still</q>, but more importantly SN 48.40 states that physical pleasure (sukha) has ceased in third Jhāna, and mental pleasure (<em>somanassa</em>) has ceased in fourth Jhāna. Therefore, according to SN 48.40 <em>kāya</em> in the context of the third Jhāna stock formula cannot refer to the physical body. The Pāli commentaries agree, and explain that <q><em>kāya</em></q> here refers to the <q>mental body</q>, in particular to mental pleasure (<em>somanassa</em>). However, a comparative study by Prof. Kuan Tse-Fu titled <q><em>Clarification on Feelings in Buddhist Dhyāna/Jhāna Meditation</em></q> brought to light that the Chinese parallel to SN 48.40 has a different sequence of disappearing types of <em>vedanā</em> in the sequence of the four Jhānas. While it would go beyond the scope of this footnote to discuss the matter in detail, it is noteworthy that the parallel to SN 48.40, the <em>Aviparātaka Sūtra</em> of the <em>Āgamas</em>, indeed mentions that bodily pleasant feeling (<em>sukha</em>) disappears only in the fourth Jhāna, whereas mental pleasant feeling (<em>somanassa</em>) has disappeared already in the third Jhāna, alongside with the disappearance of <em>pīti</em>. In the context of this chanting book, we have therefore chosen to stay with the literal translation of the word <q><em>kāya</em></q> as <q>body</q>, and invite the reader to draw his own conclusions.</p>

  <p><a href="noble-eightfold-path.xhtml#en79" id="en79appendix"><sup>79</sup></a> WPN: <q><em>viharatī’ti</em></q></p>

  <p><a href="noble-eightfold-path.xhtml#en80" id="en80appendix"><sup>80</sup></a> WPN: <q>grief</q></p>

  <p><a href="mindfulness-of-breathing.xhtml#en81" id="en81appendix"><sup>81</sup></a> WPN: <q>I shall breathe in tranquillising the bodily formations</q>. <em>Kāyasaṅkhāraṁ</em> is singular, not plural.</p>

  <p><a href="mindfulness-of-breathing.xhtml#en82" id="en82appendix"><sup>82</sup></a> WPN: <q>I shall breathe in experiencing the mental formation</q>. <em>Cittasaṅkhāraṁ</em> is probably meant to be singular, not plural, but this is not always clear when looking at compounds. Considering that the subsequent practice explicitly uses <q>mental formation</q> in singular, this suggests that it is probably used in the same way here.</p>

  <p><a href="mindfulness-of-breathing.xhtml#en83" id="en83appendix"><sup>83</sup></a> WPN: <q>I shall breathe in tranquillising the mental formation</q>. <em>Cittasaṅkhāraṁ</em> is singular, not plural.</p>

  <p><a href="mindfulness-of-breathing.xhtml#en84" id="en84appendix"><sup>84</sup></a> While <em>virāga</em> indeed can refer to the mind’s <q>fading away of passions</q> (dispassion), in certain contexts <em>virāga</em> refers to <q>fading away</q> of any phenomena. One such instance can be found in MN 74: <q>Pleasant/unpleasant/neutral feeling, Aggivessana, is impermanent, conditioned, dependently arisen, subject to destruction, vanishing, fading away, and ceasing</q>. Here, <em>virāga</em> obviously does not refer to mental dispassion, but to the nature of fading away of certain phenomena i.e. feeling. Likewise, in the context of mindfulness of breathing, <em>virāga</em> can be seen as part of the natural progression of the lifecycle of any phenomena, including but not limited to the breath itself, which after its arising, goes through a phase of change (<em>aniccā</em>), gradual fading (<em>virāga</em>), and ending in its cessation (<em>nirodha</em>). The meditator observing these stages develops an attitude of letting go (<em>paṭinissagga</em>) towards it, because there is nothing that is worth clinging/adhering to (MN 37).</p>

  <p><a href="dependent-origination.xhtml#en85" id="en85appendix"><sup>85</sup></a> This chant stems mainly from <q>The Discourse Analysis of Dependent Origination</q>, a sub-chapter from the <q>The Analysis of Dependent Origination</q>, which is part of the second book of the <em>Abhidhammapiṭaka</em> called the <q><em>Vibhaṅga</em></q> (Abh.Vibh.130f). Apart from minor variations, there is great similarity between this analysis and the analysis found in SN 12.2, in <em>Suttapiṭaka</em>. The first four lines of this chant stem from SN 12.61, which functions as an illustration of the general principle of conditionality.</p>

  <p><a href="dependent-origination.xhtml#en86" id="en86appendix"><sup>86</sup></a> Here and at other places of the English translation, the term <q>a condition</q> is used. The indefinite article <q>a</q> indicates that there could be other conditions as well (e.g. all previous conditions in the sequence are a condition for all subsequent ones), but the directly aforementioned condition is the predominant one (<em>adhipati-paccaya</em>) for the subsequent conditioned thing to arise.</p>

  <p><a href="dependent-origination.xhtml#en87" id="en87appendix"><sup>87</sup></a> Here and at other places of the English translation, the term <q>arises</q> is inserted, because the term <q><em>sambhavati</em></q> from <q><em>Jāti-paccayā jarā-maraṇaṁ; soka-parideva-dukkha-domanass’upāyāsā sambhavanti</em></q> applies to all 11 links (12 minus ignorance) and not only to ageing-and-death etc.</p>

  <p><a href="dependent-origination.xhtml#en88" id="en88appendix"><sup>88</sup></a> Elsewhere in the chanting book the term <q><em>saṅkhāra</em></q> is translated as <q>volitional formations</q>. Here, however, for the sake of ease of recitability in subsequent passages within this chant, it is translated as <q>formations</q>.</p>

  <p><a href="dependent-origination.xhtml#en89" id="en89appendix"><sup>89</sup></a> In the context of dependent origination, the compound <q><em>nāma-rūpa</em></q> is translated as <q>mind-and-body</q> in order to cover the entirety of what is conventionally called <q>a being, a person</q>. In other contexts, particularly if used separately, these terms may have other connotations.</p>

  <p><a href="dependent-origination.xhtml#en90" id="en90appendix"><sup>90</sup></a> Here and at other places of the English translation, the term <q>arises</q> is inserted, because the term <q><em>sambhavati</em></q> from <q><em>Jāti-paccayā jarā-maraṇaṁ; soka-parideva-dukkha-domanass’upāyāsā sambhavanti</em></q> applies to all 11 links (12 minus ignorance) and not only to ageing-and-death etc.</p>

  <p><a href="dependent-origination.xhtml#en91" id="en91appendix"><sup>91</sup></a> To render as <q>Therein what is from ignorance as a condition arise formations</q> would be misleading, because it is not the conditioned relationship between A and B (here: ignorance and formations) that gets elaborated upon in the following lines, but it is only the term B (here: formations), that gets defined. Hence the preferable translation: <q>Therein what are ‘formations’, arising from ignorance as a condition?</q></p>

  <p><a href="dependent-origination.xhtml#en92" id="en92appendix"><sup>92</sup></a> SN 12.51 explains: <q><em>Bhikkhus</em>, if a person immersed in ignorance generates a meritorious volitional formation, consciousness fares on to the meritorious; if he generates a demeritorious volitional formation, consciousness fares on to the demeritorious; if he generates an imperturbable volitional formation, consciousness fares on to the imperturbable</q>.</p>

  <p><a href="dependent-origination.xhtml#en93" id="en93appendix"><sup>93</sup></a> While the Pāli term <q><em>mayā</em></q> literally means <q>made of/constructed by</q>, it wouldn’t be correct to take this passage to mean that giving, virtue, and meditation are the causes for wholesome volition. Rather, the wholeosme volition leads to and expresses itself through giving, virtue, and meditation. Or in the words of Dhp 2: <q>Phenomena are preceded by the mind, surpassed by the mind, created by the mind. If one speaks or acts with a pure mind - happiness follows; just as one’s shadow that never leaves</q>.</p>

  <p><a href="dependent-origination.xhtml#en94" id="en94appendix"><sup>94</sup></a> Further explained in SN 12.25.</p>

  <p><a href="dependent-origination.xhtml#en95" id="en95appendix"><sup>95</sup></a> <em>Manosañcetanā citta-saṅkhāro</em> is translated here as <q>volition associated with the mind is the mental formation</q>. Despite <em>mano</em> and <em>citta</em> having different shades of meaning in certain contexts, both were translated here as <q>mind</q>. Generally speaking <em>mano</em> refers more to the intellectual, whereas <em>citta</em> covers more the emotional/affective aspects of the mind. A detailed analysis of these terms can be found in Rune E. A. Johansson’s <q><em>Citta, Mano, Viññāṇa — a Psychosemantic Investigation</em></q>.</p>

  <p><a href="dependent-origination.xhtml#en96" id="en96appendix"><sup>96</sup></a> While Vibh 130 introduces a new definition for <em>nāma</em> as <q><em>vedanā-kkhandho</em>, <em>saññā-kkhandho</em>, <em>saṅkhāra-kkhandho</em>,</q> this definition stands in tension with the discourses, where <em>nāma</em> is consistently defined as <em>vedanā</em>, <em>saññā</em>, <em>cetanā</em>, <em>phassa</em>, <em>manasikāra</em> (e.g. MN 9, SN 12.2). It is for this reason that the passage from Vibh 130 was replaced with the fivefold <em>nāma</em> as found throughout the suttas.</p>

  <p><a href="dependent-origination.xhtml#en97" id="en97appendix"><sup>97</sup></a> The term <em>vāda</em> in <em>attavādupādāna</em> does here not necessarily refer to <q>a doctrine</q> of self, but rather to a person’s sense of being someone; the sense of being or having a self. This is not exactly the same as personality view, which is destroyed already at the stage of stream-entry. The lingering sense of having a self may continue for a while, despite having already intellectually and/or experientially understood that there is no self to be found in relation to the five aggregates; just as conceit (<em>māna</em>) is overcome only by the path to <em>Arahantship</em>, despite having uprooted personality view already at the stage of stream-entry.</p>

  <p><a href="dependent-origination.xhtml#en98" id="en98appendix"><sup>98</sup></a> Here the Vibh. differs substantially from the analysis found in the suttas. It introduces a distinction between action becoming (<em>kammabhava</em>) and rebirth becoming (<em>upapattibhava</em>). <em>Kammabhava</em> is taken to refer to wholesome, unwholesome and imperturbable actions; <em>upapattibhava</em> is taken to refer to sense/form/formless-sphere becoming, percipient/non-percipient/neither-percipient-nor-non-percipient becoming, one/four/five-component becoming. But since AN 3.76 says that <em>kamma</em> (together with consciousness and craving) is a condition for <em>bhava</em> (if no <em>kamma</em>...then no becoming in the sense-sphere etc. would be discerned), it is not fit to say that <em>kamma</em> itself is a form of <em>bhava</em> (<em>kammabhava</em>). However, it would go too far for the purpose of this chanting book, to discuss further implications of the analysis found in Vibh. For the sake of simplicity and emphasis on the earliest strata of the Buddha’s teachings, we substituted the passage from Vibh. with the passage from SN 12.2, which defines becoming (<em>bhava</em>) simply as sense/form/formless-sphere becoming. Understood in this way, becoming (<em>bhava</em>) functions as an intermediary between clinging and birth, highlighting the gradual process of how rebirth in one of the three planes of existence takes place. This can even include an interim period between death and birth; thus it is called <q>becoming</q>, rather than instant birth straight after death.</p>

  <p><a href="dependent-origination.xhtml#en99" id="en99appendix"><sup>99</sup></a> While SN 12.2 does not contain a full elaboration on all types of <em>dukkha</em>, a similar analysis is found in DN 22.</p>

  <p><a href="dependent-origination.xhtml#en100" id="en100appendix"><sup>100</sup></a> While SN 12.2 does not contain an elaboration on the different types of misfortune (<em>vyasana</em>), it is found in DN 33, AN 4.192, and AN 5.130. <em>Diṭṭhi</em> here does not mean just any view, but <q>right view</q>. The loss of other views would not be particularly unfortunate from a Buddhist perspective, especially the loss of wrong view could be regarded as a great blessing. The right view that is lost in this example is not the right view of a noble disciple, but the right view of a worldling (<em>puthujjana</em>), whose right view is not unshakeable and who may or may not change his view later on throughout the course of the present life or subsequent births.</p>

  <p><a href="dhamma-in-brief.xhtml#en101" id="en101appendix"><sup>101</sup></a> Anglicising of Pāli words is quite arbitrary. For masc. and neuter we use the stem, but for fem. we use the nominative, wherefore <em>Gotami</em> (voc.) becomes <em>Gotamī</em>.</p>

  <p><a href="principles-of-non-decline.xhtml#en102" id="en102appendix"><sup>102</sup></a> In <em>Girimānandasutta</em> (AN 10.60) the Buddha instruced Ven. Ānanda: <q>If, Ānanda, you visit the (severely sick) bhikkhu Girimānanda and speak to him about ten perceptions, it is possible that on hearing about them his affliction will immediately subside</q>. Then the same seven perceptions as above are mentioned, with the addition of the following three: 8. the perception of non-delight in the entire world; 9. the perception of impermanence in all conditioned phenomena, and 10. mindfulness of breathing. <em>Girimānandasutta</em> concludes: <q>Then, when the Venerable Ānanda had learned these ten perceptions from the Blessed One, he went to the Venerable Girimānanda and spoke to him about them. When the Venerable Girimānanda heard about these ten perceptions, his affliction immediately subsided</q>.</p>

  <p><a href="striving-according-to-dhamma.xhtml#en103" id="en103appendix"><sup>103</sup></a> WPN: <q>By human strength/energy/effort</q>; while <em>purisa</em> can also mean person, or human, in this context it probably refers to the feature of strength, which is typically associated with masculinity. A similar analogy occurs with the expression of a strong man (<em>purisa</em>) extending or contracting his arm (AN 7.61).</p>

  <p><a href="striving-according-to-dhamma.xhtml#en104" id="en104appendix"><sup>104</sup></a> WPN: omitted <q>evil</q> (<em>pāpa</em>) in its translation.</p>

  <p><a href="striving-according-to-dhamma.xhtml#en105" id="en105appendix"><sup>105</sup></a> WPN: <q>like the cream of the milk</q>; <em>maṇḍapeyya</em> is a Pāli idiom, meaning <q>of the best quality (lit. to be drunk like cream)</q></p>

  <p><a href="striving-according-to-dhamma.xhtml#en106" id="en106appendix"><sup>106</sup></a> WPN: <q>avaññā</q></p>

  <p><a href="striving-according-to-dhamma.xhtml#en107" id="en107appendix"><sup>107</sup></a> WPN: <q>thinking in such a way: our going forth will not be barren</q></p>

  <p><a href="striving-according-to-dhamma.xhtml#en108" id="en108appendix"><sup>108</sup></a> WPN: <q>And supports for the sick</q></p>

  <p><a href="striving-according-to-dhamma.xhtml#en109" id="en109appendix"><sup>109</sup></a> WPN: <q>sampādetun</q></p>

  <p><a href="buddhas-final-instruction.xhtml#en110" id="en110appendix"><sup>110</sup></a> WPN: <q>Change is the nature of conditioned things</q></p>

  <p><a href="universal-well-being.xhtml#en111" id="en111appendix"><sup>111</sup></a> In the original version, this line is followed by <q>When they act upon intention</q>, which is not found in the Pāli, and is potentially misleading, giving the implication that intention alone is not enough to count as kamma.</p>

  <p><a href="universal-well-being.xhtml#en112" id="en112appendix"><sup>112</sup></a> WPN: <q>All beings are the owners of their action and inherit its results. Their future is born from such action, companion to such action, and its results will be their home. All actions with intention, be they skilful or harmful, of such acts they will be the heirs</q>. For the sake of consistency with other chants within this chanting book, the original version was replaced with the one found in the <q>Five Subjects for Frequent Reflection</q>, and <q>Ten Subjects for Frequent Reflection</q>.</p>

  <p><a href="divine-abidings.xhtml#en113" id="en113appendix"><sup>113</sup></a> The compound <em>sabbattatāya</em> (<em>sabba-t-tatāya</em>) seems to be an extension of its predecessor <em>sabbadhi</em> (everywhere), and could thus even more suitably be translated as <q>spreading to the entire (world)</q>; <em>tata</em>: extended; spread out. (pp. of <em>tanoti</em>).</p>

  <p><a href="divine-abidings.xhtml#en114" id="en114appendix"><sup>114</sup></a> WPN: <q>a heart imbued with gladness</q></p>

  <p><a href="five-reflections.xhtml#en115" id="en115appendix"><sup>115</sup></a> WPN: <q>For good or for ill, of that I will be the heir</q>. For the sake of consistency with other passages which were translated differently, that translation has been chosen.</p>

  <p><a href="five-reflections.xhtml#en116" id="en116appendix"><sup>116</sup></a> WPN: <q>recollect</q></p>

  <p><a href="ten-reflections.xhtml#en117" id="en117appendix"><sup>117</sup></a> WPN: <q><em>Bhikkhus</em> there are ten <em>dhammas</em></q></p>

  <p><a href="ten-reflections.xhtml#en118" id="en118appendix"><sup>118</sup></a> WPN: <q>I am no longer living according to worldly aims and values</q></p>

  <p><a href="ten-reflections.xhtml#en119" id="en119appendix"><sup>119</sup></a> WPN: <q>I should strive to abandon my former habits</q></p>

  <p><a href="ten-reflections.xhtml#en120" id="en120appendix"><sup>120</sup></a> WPN: <q>For good or for ill, Of that I will be the heir</q> For the sake of consistency with other passages which were translated differently, this translation has been chosen.</p>

  <p><a href="32-parts.xhtml#en121" id="en121appendix"><sup>121</sup></a> WPN: <q>bowels</q></p>

  <p><a href="32-parts.xhtml#en122" id="en122appendix"><sup>122</sup></a> WPN: <q>entrails</q></p>

  <p><a href="32-parts.xhtml#en123" id="en123appendix"><sup>123</sup></a> In the discourses, except for one occasion in the Khp, the brain is not mentioned as a separate organ or body part, making it a list of only 31 body parts.</p>

  <p><a href="recollection-of-impermanence.xhtml#en124" id="en124appendix"><sup>124</sup></a> WPN: <q>Everything is void of self</q></p>

  <p><a href="recollection-of-impermanence.xhtml#en125" id="en125appendix"><sup>125</sup></a> WPN: <q>Completely void of use</q></p>

  <p><a href="recollection-of-impermanence.xhtml#en126" id="en126appendix"><sup>126</sup></a> WPN: <q>Their nature is to rise and fall</q></p>

  <p><a href="anatta-lakkhana.xhtml#en127" id="en127appendix"><sup>127</sup></a>The following passage is absent in the Thai edition of the <em>Tipiṭaka</em>: <q><em>Bhikkhavo</em></q><em>ti</em>; <q><em>Bhadante</em></q><em>ti te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṁ. Bhagavā etad’avoca</em>.</p>

  <p><a href="characteristic-of-not-self.xhtml#en128" id="en128appendix"><sup>128</sup></a> The entire original version of the English translation has been replaced.</p>

  <p><a href="characteristic-of-not-self.xhtml#en129" id="en129appendix"><sup>129</sup></a> The following passage is absent in the Thai edition of the <em>Tipiṭaka</em>: <q>‘<em>Bhikkhus</em>’ – ‘Venerable sir’, they replied. The Blessed One said this:</q></p>

  <p><a href="characteristic-of-not-self.xhtml#en130" id="en130appendix"><sup>130</sup></a> <em>Ariyasāvaka</em> can be translated as <q>noble disciple</q> or <q>disciple of the noble one</q> (<em>ariyassa</em>+<em>sāvaka</em>=<em>ariyasāvaka</em>). I have opted for the first option here because the discourse addresses the group of five monks who all were <em>Ariyas</em> already at that time, but it needs to be kept in mind that the term <em>ariyasāvaka</em> does not always refer to individuals who have already attained one of the four paths or fruits. This can be seen from MN 27, where a person is referred to as <em>ariyasāvaka</em> without reference to any form of awakening-attainment. It is only at the end of the discourse that this <em>ariyasāvaka</em> attains awakening.</p>

  <p><a href="characteristic-of-not-self.xhtml#en131" id="en131appendix"><sup>131</sup></a> The word <q>the teaching</q> is not explicitly expressed in the Pāḷi, but was inserted for comprehension.</p>

  <p><a href="characteristic-of-not-self.xhtml#en132" id="en132appendix"><sup>132</sup></a> <em>Kataṁ karaṇīyaṁ, n’āparaṁ itthattāyā’ti</em> literally means <q>What has to be done is done. There is nothing else (to so) for the sake of such a (liberated) state</q>. For a discussion of this passage see Bhikkhu Bodhi, Middle Length Discourses, <em>Bhayabheravasutta</em>, MN 4, footnote 76.</p>

  <p><a href="exposition-on-burning.xhtml#en133" id="en133appendix"><sup>133</sup></a> The entire original version of the English translation has been replaced.</p>

  <p><a href="just-as-rivers.xhtml#en134" id="en134appendix"><sup>134</sup></a> WPN: <q>So will what’s here been given</q></p>

  <p><a href="just-as-rivers.xhtml#en135" id="en135appendix"><sup>135</sup></a> WPN: <q>Bring blessings to departed spirits</q></p>

  <p><a href="just-as-rivers.xhtml#en136" id="en136appendix"><sup>136</sup></a> When chanted for laypeople, the first part of this chant, until here, is recited only by the <em>Saṅghatthera</em>.</p>

  <p><a href="just-as-rivers.xhtml#en137" id="en137appendix"><sup>137</sup></a> When chanted for laypeople, this line is recited only by the secondmost senior monk. Afterwards, the remainder of the Saṅgha joins in.</p>

  <p><a href="thanksgiving-recitations.xhtml#en138" id="en138appendix"><sup>138</sup></a> When chanted for laypeople, the first part of this chant, until here, is recited only by the Saṅghatthera.</p>

  <p><a href="thanksgiving-recitations.xhtml#en139" id="en139appendix"><sup>139</sup></a> This line is recited only by the secondmost senior monk. Afterwards, the remainder of the Saṅgha joins in.</p>

  <p><a href="thanksgiving-recitations.xhtml#en140" id="en140appendix"><sup>140</sup></a> In the Thai tradition, a long pause is made after <q><em>sukhaṁ</em></q>, and <q><em>balaṁ</em></q> is recited in a slow and drawn-out manner.</p>

  <p><a href="thanksgiving-recitations.xhtml#en141" id="en141appendix"><sup>141</sup></a> For translations of the above see the the previous chant, titled <q>Just as Rivers Full of Water</q>.</p>

  <p><a href="thanksgiving-recitations.xhtml#en142" id="en142appendix"><sup>142</sup></a> The first four lines were composed by Āyasmā Aggacitta, functioning as an introduction to the chant.</p>

  <p><a href="thanksgiving-recitations.xhtml#en143" id="en143appendix"><sup>143</sup></a> WPN: <q><em>paṭībhāna-do</em></q></p>

  <p><a href="protective-recitations.xhtml#en144" id="en144appendix"><sup>144</sup></a> The <q>Invitation to the Devas</q> is traditionally performed as a solo introduction by the thirdmost senior monk. However, any monk who has been invited by the <em>Saṅghatthera</em> can do so.</p>

  <p><a href="protective-recitations.xhtml#en145" id="en145appendix"><sup>145</sup></a> When chanted for laypeople, only the second line (<em>Dhamma-ssavana kālo</em>...) is recited, which is repeated three times.</p>

  <p><a href="protective-recitations.xhtml#en146" id="en146appendix"><sup>146</sup></a> WPN: <q><em>Payirūpāsana</em></q>. <em>Pari</em> + <em>upa</em> = <em>payirupa</em></p>

  <p><a href="protective-recitations.xhtml#en147" id="en147appendix"><sup>147</sup></a> WPN: <q><em>Osathaṁ</em></q>. <em>Osatha</em> is not a word found in Pāli dictionaries, but <q><em>osadha</em></q> (medicine) is. The spelling <q><em>osatha</em></q> is due to a faulty transliteration, influenced by Thai style of Pāli pronunciation, where <q>d</q> often becomes <q>t</q>. The <em>Mahā-jaya-maṅgala-gāthā</em> was originally composed in Sri Lanka. The Sri Lankan version indeed speaks of <q><em>osadha</em></q>, thus confirming above explanation for the spelling error.</p>

  <p><a href="protective-recitations.xhtml#en148" id="en148appendix"><sup>148</sup></a> WPN: <q><em>devānumodantu</em></q></p>

  <p><a href="protective-recitations.xhtml#en149" id="en149appendix"><sup>149</sup></a> Here and in all subsequent verses we find the word <q><em>jitavā</em></q>. The standard spelling would be <q><em>jitvā</em></q> (abs. of <em>jināti</em>; having conquered). In contrast <q><em>jitavā</em></q> is a transliteration based on Thai spelling and pronunciation of Pāli, which has a tendency to insert the letter <q>a</q> between two consonants such as -<em>tvā</em>, thus making it into -<em>tavā</em>. It is by spelling anomalies like this, that Pāli scholars can determine the place of origin and age of certain Pāli texts.</p>

  <p><a href="protective-recitations.xhtml#en150" id="en150appendix"><sup>150</sup></a> WPN: <q><em>paṇidhi</em></q> and <q><em>padakkhiṇā</em></q></p>

  <p><a href="funeral-recitations.xhtml#en151" id="en151appendix"><sup>151</sup></a> While these faculties are mentioned as a set of 22 only in the Abhi. Vibh., all of them are also found within the discourses.</p>

  <p><a href="funeral-recitations.xhtml#en152" id="en152appendix"><sup>152</sup></a> WPN: <q>Their nature is to rise and fall</q></p>

  <p><a href="sharing-aspirations.xhtml#en153" id="en153appendix"><sup>153</sup></a> While the celestial bodies themselves are not regarded as living beings, this passage refers to the similarly named young devas (<em>candimā</em>/<em>sūriyo devaputto</em>) residing there. See also SN 2.9-10. Furthermore, the term <q><em>rājā</em></q> (leaders/kings) does not refer to <q><em>guṅavantā</em></q> (virtuous people), but to <q><em>suriyo candima</em></q> (sun and moon). A translation closer to the meaning of the Pāli would be: <q>The sovereign Sun and Moon, and also virtuous people</q>.</p>

  <p><a href="sharing-aspirations.xhtml#en154" id="en154appendix"><sup>154</sup></a> This probably refers to 1. worldly or human happiness; 2. celestial or heavenly happiness; 3. transcendent happiness or <em>Nibbāna</em>. Rhys Davids Pāli-English Dictionary - <em>sukha</em>: <q>Two kinds, viz <em>kāyika</em> &amp; <em>cetasika</em>; at Pts.i.188; several other pairs at AN.i.80; three (praise, wealth, heaven) Iti.67; another three (<em>manussa</em>°, <em>dibba</em>°, <em>Nibbāna</em>°) Dhp-a.iii.51; four (possessing, making good use of possessions, having no debts, living a blameless life) AN.ii.69</q></p>

  <p><a href="sharing-aspirations.xhtml#en155" id="en155appendix"><sup>155</sup></a> The Pāli speaks about <em>Māra’s</em> forces.</p>

  <p><a href="sharing-aspirations.xhtml#en156" id="en156appendix"><sup>156</sup></a> Even though a <em>Paccekabuddha</em> does not (or is not able to) teach the path to <em>Nibbāna</em>, he can nonetheless give guidance in good conduct and virtue; functioning as an inspirational role model.</p>

  <p><a href="sharing-aspirations.xhtml#en157" id="en157appendix"><sup>157</sup></a> <q>Darkness and delusion</q> is not a literal translation for Māra.</p>

  <p><a href="refuge-trainings.xhtml#en158" id="en158appendix"><sup>158</sup></a> The Thai tradition recites <q><em>Ahaṁ bhante tisaraṇena saha pañca/aṭṭha sīlāni yācāmi</em></q> three times which translates to <q>I, venerable sir, request the Three Refuges and the Five/Eight Precepts</q> before <q>Namo tassa...</q></p>

  <p><a href="five-trainings.xhtml#en159" id="en159appendix"><sup>159</sup></a> WPN: <q>precept</q>. The same applies to the next four lines.</p>

  <p><a href="five-trainings.xhtml#en160" id="en160appendix"><sup>160</sup></a> WPN: <q>drugs which lead to carelessness</q></p>

  <p><a href="eight-trainings.xhtml#en161" id="en161appendix"><sup>161</sup></a> WPN: <q>which</q></p>

  <p><a href="eight-trainings.xhtml#en162" id="en162appendix"><sup>162</sup></a> WPN: <q>at inappropriate times</q></p>

  <p><a href="eight-trainings.xhtml#en163" id="en163appendix"><sup>163</sup></a> WPN: <q>entertainment, beautification, and adornment</q></p>

  <p><a href="eight-trainings.xhtml#en164" id="en164appendix"><sup>164</sup></a> WPN: <q>These are the Eight Precepts; Virtue is the source of happiness, Virtue is the source of true wealth, Virtue is the source of peacefulness. Therefore let virtue be purified</q></p>
</body>
</html>