<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>The Refuges and Trainings</title>
  <link href="../Styles/bottomnav.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
  <link href="../Styles/main.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
  <link href="../Styles/suttaref.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
</head>

<body>
  <h2><a style="font-style:normal;" href="schedule.xhtml">The Refuges and Trainings</a><a id="refuge-trainings"></a></h2>

  <hr/>

  <div class="section-title">
    Undertaking the Three Refuges<a id="en158" href="endnotes.xhtml#en158appendix"><sup>158</sup></a><a id="three-refuges"></a>
  </div>

  <p style="text-align:center;">(Repeat each phrase after the leader)</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa <span style="float: right;">[3x]</span></p>

  <p class="english-hang">Homage to the Blessed, Worthy, and Perfectly Enlightened One.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Buddhaṁ saraṇaṁ gacchāmi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Dhammaṁ saraṇaṁ gacchāmi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Saṅghaṁ saraṇaṁ gacchāmi</p>

  <p class="english-hang">To the Buddha I go for refuge.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">To the Dhamma I go for refuge.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">To the Saṅgha I go for refuge.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Dutiyam&#8217;pi buddhaṁ saraṇaṁ gacchāmi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Dutiyam&#8217;pi dhammaṁ saraṇaṁ gacchāmi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Dutiyam&#8217;pi saṅghaṁ saraṇaṁ gacchāmi</p>

  <p class="english-hang">For the second time, to the Buddha I go for refuge.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">For the second time, to the Dhamma I go for refuge.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">For the second time, to the Saṅgha I go for refuge.</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Tatiyam&#8217;pi buddhaṁ saraṇaṁ gacchāmi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tatiyam&#8217;pi dhammaṁ saraṇaṁ gacchāmi</p>

  <p class="pali-hang-together">Tatiyam&#8217;pi saṅghaṁ saraṇaṁ gacchāmi</p>

  <p class="english-hang">For the third time, to the Buddha I go for refuge.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">For the third time, to the Dhamma I go for refuge.</p>

  <p class="english-hang-together">For the third time, to the Saṅgha I go for refuge.</p>

  <p class="pali-leader">〈 Tisaraṇa-gamanaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ&#160;〉</p>

  <p class="english-leader">〈 This completes the going to the Three Refuges.&#160;〉</p>

  <p class="pali-hang">Āma bhante</p>

  <p class="english-hang">Yes, venerable sir.</p>
</body>
</html>